Causal Inference for Time series Analysis: Problems, Methods and Evaluation

arXiv:2102.05829v1 [cs.LG] 11 Feb 2021

Raha Moraffah∗, Paras Sheth∗, Mansooreh Karami∗, Anchit Bhattacharya∗ Qianru Wang‡‡, Anique Tahir∗, Adrienne Raglin†, Huan Liu∗
∗Computer Science & Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
††Northwestern Polytechnical University, †Army Research Lab, USA
∗{rmoraffa, psheth5,mkarami, abhatt22, artahir, huanliu}@asu.edu , ††qr369wang@gmail.com,
†adrienne.raglin2.civ@mail.mil

ABSTRACT
Time series data is a collection of chronological observations which are generated by several domains such as medical and ﬁnancial ﬁelds. Over the years, diﬀerent tasks such as classiﬁcation, forecasting and clustering have been proposed to analyze this type of data. Time series data has been also used to study the eﬀect of interventions overtime. Moreover, in many ﬁelds of science, learning the causal structure of dynamic systems and time series data is considered an interesting task which plays an important role in scientiﬁc discoveries. Estimating the eﬀect of an intervention and identifying the causal relations from the data can be performed via causal inference. Existing surveys on time series discuss traditional tasks such as classiﬁcation and forecasting or explain the details of the approaches proposed to solve a speciﬁc task. In this paper, we focus on two causal inference tasks, i.e., treatment eﬀect estimation and causal discovery for time series data and provide a comprehensive review of the approaches in each task. Furthermore, we curate a list of commonly used evaluation metrics and datasets for each task and provide an in-depth insight. These metrics and datasets can serve as benchmark for research in the ﬁeld.
1. INTRODUCTION
Time series data consist of ordered sequences of real-valued data which are often collected over time. With the rapid growth of time series data generated by diﬀerent domains such as bioinformatics, medical, neuroscience and ﬁnancial applications, various approaches have been developed. Research on time series data has been going on for over a decade and researchers have come up with diﬀerent approaches to analyze this type of data for diﬀerent purposes such as classiﬁcation [98, 124], clustering [92, 105], forecasting [73, 165], estimating the impact of an intervention/treatment over time [112, 13] and discovering the causal relations between the time series components [56, 47]. In this survey, we focus on the last two tasks, i.e., estimating the eﬀect of an intervention/treatment and identifying the causal relations and refer to them as causal inference for time series analysis. Questions such as “Was an enforced policy eﬀective?” or “Which medicine works better for a speciﬁc disease?” are crucial questions in law-making and medical ﬁelds and answers to these questions can help making important decisions/policies.

In order to answer such questions with data, one needs to estimate the eﬀect of an intervention/treatment. For example, to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of tabacco control program, Abadie et al. [1] propose a framework to estimate the eﬀect of this program on cigarette sales. In another example, Bica et al. [25] propose a framework to predict patient’s response to a speciﬁc medicine over time. The task of estimating such eﬀects from the data is called causal treatment eﬀect estimation. Causal treatment eﬀect estimation is one the most important tasks in causal inference which leverages concepts from causality to estimate this eﬀect from the data. The state-of-the-art causal treatment eﬀect estimation approaches for time series data can be categorized into three main types: 1)time-invariant treatment eﬀect; 2)time-varying treatment eﬀect; and 3)dynamic regimes. We discuss some widely used methods in each category.
Another principal task discussed in this survey is causal discovery. Causal discovery is the task of identifying the causal relationships between variables in the data. Causal discovery for time series data refers to the task of understanding and identifying interdependencies amongst individual components of a time series. This task is seen in a variety of applications such as economy and earth system science. For instance, causal discovery can be used to identify the performance indicators of stock analysis [68] or discover the causal relations between the external drivers of climate change and climate variables [154, 137]. We classify causal discovery approaches for time series data into three main categories, namely, Granger causality and conditional independence based, structural equation model based, and deep learning based methods and discuss them in detail.
Despite having extensive surveys on non-causal time series analysis from diﬀerent perspectives such as time series classiﬁcation [3], deep learning and unsupervised feature learning [48] and data mining approaches [49], no existing survey reviews the current progress of algorithms which are designed to analyze time series data from a causal perspective. Different from existing eﬀorts, in this paper, we discuss the state-of-the-art methods for causal inference for time series analysis and its two main tasks. Since the evaluation of causal inference in general and causal inference on time series in particular is a challenging task, we also enlist some benchmark datasets and evaluation metrics which are commonly used by the researchers.
We ﬁrst explain prevalent methods and concepts used for modeling time series data (Section 2). We then discuss necessary deﬁnitions and assumptions for causal inference on

time series data which are used in the rest of the paper (Section 3). Next, we discuss causal treatment eﬀect estimation and causal discovery for time series (Sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively). We then provide extensive guidelines on how the frameworks proposed for each of these tasks can be evaluated by presenting a list of commonly used datasets and evaluation metrics (Section 5). We conclude this work with some future directions (Section 6).

2. MODELING TIME SERIES DATA
Time series data is a sequence of real-valued data with each data point related to a timestamp. Mathematically, time series data is denoted as X(t) = (x1(t), x2(t),..., xk(t)) where k is the number of variables measured at a discrete timestep t ∈ Z. In this section we discuss diﬀerent techniques to model a time series data.

2.1 Autoregressive Models
One of the earlier methods to model time-series data is the AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) model. The ARIMA models the time-series assuming three fundamental relationships between the time series - autoregressive, moving average, and diﬀerencing. The Autoregressive (AR) component determines the value of a current timestamp X(t) from a ﬁnite set of previous timestamp values of some length p and some error . The order of autoregression is the number of preceding timestamps used to determine the value of the current timestamp, given by

p

AR(p) = ai.X(t − i) + c + t,

(1)

i=1

where ai and p are the coeﬃcients and the order of the AR model, respectively. The moving average (MA) component models the value of a current timestamp X(t) as a linear combination of the prediction errors( t) at the previous timestamps of length q, where q is the order of the moving average component.

q

M A(q) = bi. t−i + µ + t,

(2)

i=1

where bi, µ and q are the coeﬃcients, mean of the series and the order of the MA model, respectively.
The AR and MA components are enough to model a time series in the case the time series data is stationary i.e. the time series have the same values of speciﬁc properties (mean, variance) over every time interval. In the case of non-stationary data, as shown in Equation 3, the time series data is differenced with a shifted version of itself to make the data stationary.

Y (t) = X(t) − X(t − r),

(3)

where r is the order of diﬀerencing.
The primary task in this type of modeling is estimating the coeﬃcients ai in AR and bi in MA models, as well as the orders p, q, and r of the AR, MA, and diﬀerencing, respectively. The Box and Jenkins [27] approach is used to estimate the parameters of an ARIMA model, assuming an underlying model, and verifying if the residuals or error term is a random distribution. This process is repeated

with diﬀerent models until the right model is obtained. The Simple Exponential Smoothing (SES) [31] is a modiﬁcation of the ARIMA model with exponential weights assigned to each observation. Double and Triple Exponential Smoothing (DES and TES) [73] handles non-stationary data by introducing an additional parameter β for smoothing the trend in the series. Moreover, an extra parameter γ is introduced in TES to control the inﬂuence of seasonality.
2.2 Dynamic Bayesian Networks
Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs) are an extension of Bayesian Networks (BNs) to model the evolution of random variables as a function of a discrete timestep sequence, represented as a directed acyclic graph. Formally, a Bayesian Network is deﬁned by G = (V, E), where V and E are the set of nodes and edges. The conditional probability distribution of the set of nodes V can be expressed as the factorized joint probability given by:

P (V ) = P (x|πx),

(4)

x∈V

where πx are the parents of node x. A DBN is represented as a pair of two Bayesian networks Bp and B2d. Bp is a BN modeling the prior distribution of the random variables at time 1. B2d is a two slice BN representing the transition from time t-1 to time t, as a probability distribution P(xt|xt−1) for nodes x belonging to V by means of a directed acyclic graph G =(V,E) as follows:

P (Vt|Vt−1) =

P (xt|πxt )

(5)

x∈V ,πx ∈V

If we deﬁne T as the total length of the path, the joint distribution of the sequence is given by:

T

P (V0:T ) = PBp (x1|πx1 ) ×

PB2d (xt|π(xt)) (6)

x∈V

t=2 x∈V

Typically, the variables in a DBN, are partitioned into two sets of variables, Vt = (Zt, Xt), representing the hidden and output (observed) variables of a state-space model. The parameters of the DBN can be learned from the data. Based on the probability distributions and the assumptions made on the dynamics (in the case of observable data), Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) or Maximum A Priori (MAP) is used. For hidden variable models, the parameters are generally learned using the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. Next, we discuss two of the state-of-the-art DBN models used for time series modeling.

2.2.1 State-Space Models
State-space models use a latent state zt to model the time series data, i.e. encoding time series components level, trend and seasonality patterns. An SSM is denoted by a statetransition equation, which describes the transition dynamics p(zt|zt−1) of the evolution of the latent state over time. It also represents an observation model that describes the conditional probability p(xt|zt) of observations given the latent state. A widely used example of SSM is the linear dynamical system (LDS), where the states are real-valued and

change linearly with time, satisfying the ﬁrst-order Markov assumption. The LDS can be expressed by the following equations:
zt = Azt−1 + η, zt ∈ Rk, η ∼ N (0, Q) (7) xt = Czt + , xt ∈ Rd, ∼ N (0, R), (8)
where A ∈ RkXk, C ∈ RdXk, while Q and R are covariance matrices. The joint probability for the states and observations is given by:
T
P (zt, xt) = P (z1)P (x1|z1) P (zt|zt−1)P (xt|zt) (9)
t=2
The Kalman ﬁltering algorithm [83] is used to perform inference tasks such as ﬁltering (p(zt|x1:t)), smoothing (p(zt|x1:T )), and prediction (p(xt|x1:t−1)). Nonlinear extensions of the LDS is proposed in unscented Kalman Filter [82], by generalizing the state transition and emission to nonlinear functions. Zheng et al. [179] proposed State-space LSTM which modeled the sequential latent states by parameterizing the transition function between states by a neural network. The Particle Gibbs [6] is used for parameter estimation of the model which samples from the joint posterior, eliminating the need to sample at each time point thus removing the assumption of a factorizable posterior. Karl et al. [84] uses the stochastic gradient variational Bayes to learn the latent state dynamics under a nonlinear Markovian setting. Instead of a deterministic f and g functions, Wang et al. [164] placed Gaussian process priors over both the nonlinear functions f and g and found a MAP estimate of the latent variables. Switching state-space models [51], model the observations xt using M real-valued hidden state-space vectors ztm and one discrete state vector st. A multinomial variable with M possible values represents the discrete state variable st ∈ (1, ..., M ) which acts as a switch variable. The observed variable is represented using the state-space model m, conditioned on this discrete state. The discrete state follows a Markovian dynamics with a speciﬁed initial state(p(s1)) and transition probability matrix(pst|st−1 ). The real-valued state variables have linear-Gaussian dynamics with each variable having its transition matrix, initial state, and noise. The joint distribution of the observed and hidden variables is given by:

T
P (st, zt1, ..., ztm, xt) = P (s1) P (st|st−1)

t=2

M

T

× P (z1m) P (ztm|zt−1 m )

m=1

t=2

T
× P (xt|zt1, ..., ztM , st)

t=1

(10)

The discrete switch variable acts as a gating network for the M real-valued states. Gibbs sampling is used to approximate the marginal probabilities, required for the evaluation of the expectations for learning the model parameters using the EM algorithm.

2.2.2 Hidden Markov Model
The Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is another class of SSM, where the states are assumed to be discrete and distributed

according to the Markov Process. The joint probability distribution of the discrete hidden state st and the observed sequence xt can be denoted similarly to the SSM as:

T
P (st, xt) = P (s1)P (x1|s1) P (st|st−1)P (xt|st)
t=2

(11)

The Baum-Welch algorithm [20], a type of EM algorithms for HMM, is used to learn the parameters of this model.
In many applications, the HMM model is extended by representing the P (xt|st) using a mixture of Gaussians for each state (Mt), forcing xt to get the information from st bottlenecked through Mt. Autoregressive HMMs [145] relaxes the HMM assumption of conditional independence of observations given the hidden state, by allowing xt to be connected to xt−1 along with the hidden state st. Factorial HMMs [52] extend the HMM by having a collection of discrete state variables, as opposed to a single state variable for the original HMM. The state variable st is represented as a combination of (s1t , ... , sM t ), each of which can take K possible values. This will extend the state space to KM possible values, which is equivalent to a regular HMM with KM states. Ghahramani et al. [50] proposes a constraint on the interactions of the state variables, in which the state variables evolve through the following dynamics:

M

P (st|st−1) =

P (stm|stm−1),

m=1

(12)

thus uncoupling the diﬀerent state variables from each other.
The uncoupling of state variables was relaxed in Saul et al. [141] by coupling the variables of a time step in order, i.e stm interacts with stn for 1 ≤ n < m. The model parameters are learned using the EM algorithm, where the marginal probabilities used for the expectations are approximated using the Gibbs sampling algorithm.

2.3 Gaussian Processes
Taking advantage of available data and performing robust analysis is only practical through modeling the uncertainty. Therefore, the Bayesian inference is leveraged to handle uncertainty in a noisy and dynamic environment. Gaussian Processes are a class of Bayesian nonparametric models that are particularly suitable for modeling time series data. In particular, Gaussian Processes (GPs) are a class of stochastic processes, which deﬁne a joint Gaussian distribution over a collection of random variables. A function (f (x)) which follows a Gaussian process, is speciﬁed by the
mean (m(x)) and covariance (k(x, x ) functions, denoted as
f (x) ∼ GP (m(x), k(x, x )). Formally, the gaussian process responsible for generating Y given X is given by,
yn = f (xn) + n, ∼ N 0, σ2I (13)

where is the Gaussian noise term. In what follows, we brieﬂy discuss the Gaussian processes frameworks.

2.3.1 Deep Learning and GP
Motivated by the success of Deep models in diﬀerent tasks, recently, several attempts have been made to combine deep models with Gaussian processes [42, 168, 169, 106] and

create Deep Gaussian Process (Deep GP) models. These frameworks typically use neural networks to map the input to the feature space (extract non-stationary features) whereas the last layer sparse Gaussian process performs regression over the latent space. For example, Wilson et al. [169] propose to leverage fully connected and convolutional neural networks as input to the spectral mixture base kernel and use local kernel interpolation [167], spectral mixture covariance functions [166], inducing points [122] and structure exploiting algebra [138] and create more powerful and expressive closedform covariance kernel for Gaussian Processes. In another attempt, Maddix et al. [106] propose a scalable hybrid model which combines both deep neural network and classic time series model to perform accurate forecasting which also takes uncertainty into account.The model consists of a global deep neural network and a local Gaussian Process model.
2.3.2 GP Methods for Inference
Havasi et al. [63] propose an inference method for Deep Gaussian Processes models based on the Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method. The paper also shows that the posterior in these models is of non-Gaussian nature and therefore, the existing approaches based on the variational inference that estimate a Gaussian posterior are poor potential approximations for the multimodal posterior. The authors in [95] propose an uncertainty-aware classiﬁcation framework that facilitates learning black-box classiﬁcation models for classifying sparse and irregularly sampled time series. The framework uses Gaussian Process regression to transform the irregular time series data into a uniform representation, which permits sparse and irregularly sampled data to be fed into any black-box classiﬁer which is learnable using gradient descent while preserving uncertainty. Tobar et al. [161] propose a framework called Gaussian Process Convolutional Model (GPCM), which serves as a generative model for stationary time series. The main idea behind this model is based on the convolution between a ﬁlter function and a white noise process. This approach recovers a posterior distribution over the spectral density directly from the time series. It also places the nonparametric prior over the spectral density before recovering the posterior distribution. Learning the model from the data allows performing inference on the covariance kernel as well as the spectrum in a probabilistic, analytic, and computationally tractable manner. Cunningham et al. [41] propose a Gaussian Process model for analyzing multiple time series with multiple time markings. The proposed model can be considered as a mapping between the input space and the given data markers. Because of this, the model can be used as a choice for a covariance function. It also facilitates learning and inference to be standard. HajiGhassemi et al. [60] propose an algorithm for long term forecasting with periodic Gaussian processes. They also state that, for long term forecasting it is necessary to map the probability distributions through Gaussian Processes. They use re-parameterization of a commonly used stationary periodic kernel which in turn allows them to employ an analytic double approximation strategy to compute the moments of the predictive distribution. For a comprehensive surveys on Gaussian Processes and how they can be used to model time series data and scaled to big data scenario, we refer the reader to three studies provided by Rasmussen [123], Roberts et al. [125], and Liu et al. [100].

2.4 Neural Networks
For more complex, noisy, and higher dimensional real-world data model assumption techniques such as ARIMA, statespace models is not an eﬃcient technique since the dynamics are unknown or too complex [159]. Various unsupervised generative models have been extended for time series data to solve this problem. Graves et al. [57] proposed a method for sequence generation using recurrent models such as RNN and LSTM, by processing the real data at each step (xt) and predicting the value of the next step (xt+1). Output predictions (yt) at each step are made probabilistic and sampled from to be fed as the next step input. Iteratively sampling at each step from the already trained network, and passing it to the next step produces a novel sequence. Although theoretically possible, RNNs in practice suﬀer to capture long-term dependencies, and thus LSTMs are used which are shown to capture long term dependencies with the help of various gating mechanisms. Additionally, the hidden layers are stacked to increase the depth across space to allow for higher non-linearities to be captured at each time step. The probability of the input sequence x is given by Pr(x) =
t=1 T P r(xt+1|yt). Restricted Boltzmann Machine(RBM), a generative probabilistic model between the input nodes (observable) and latent nodes (hidden), connected by a weight matrix (W) and having associated bias vectors c and b respectively, is extended for sequential data in various works. The model is generally trained by minimizing the reconstruction error using contrastive divergence [69]. Conditional RBM and temporal RBM [157] extend the RBM model with a connection between the current hidden units and the past observable units along with auto-regressive weights for capturing shortterm temporal patterns. The dependency between the bias vectors and the past visible units are deﬁned by,

n
bj = bj + Bix(t − i)
i n
ci = ci + Aix(t − i),
i

(14)

where Bi and Ai are the weight matrices connecting respectively current hidden units and current observable units to observable units at time t − i. Thus the conditional probabilities for activation of the hidden units and the visible units become:

P (hj |x) = σ(bj + Wij xi) +

i

k

P (xi|h) = σ(ci + Wij hj ) +

i

k

Bijkxi(t − k)
i (15) Aijkxi(t − k)
i

Oord et al. [115] proposed a CNN based architecture called WaveNet to generate audio waveforms. WaveNet tries to approximate the joint probability of the time series X = (x1, x2, ..., xT ) by making x depend on all the previous samples. WaveNet uses a special convolutional layer called the dilated causal convolution. A causal convolution forces the prediction at any timestep to depend on the previous timesteps and prevents dependencies on future timesteps. Dilated convolutions is a ﬁlter which can span larger than it’s length by dilation with zeros, skipping input values at some steps, thus

increasing the receptive ﬁeld of the ﬁlters with increasing depth. Additionally, gated activated units are used which allows the network the ability to preserve and forget certain input values. Undecimated Fully Convolutional Network (UFCNN) [109], uses Fully Convolutional Layers with 1-D causal ﬁlters, and the ﬁlter’s at lth resolution level is upsampled by a factor of 2l−1 along the time dimension along with removal of max-pooling layers and other upsampling operators.
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) based models have also been proposed for Time Series Generation. Mogren et al. [111] proposed C-RNN-GAN to generate continuous sequential data by modeling the joint probability distribution of the sequence. The generator was designed using an LSTM and the discriminator consisted of a bidirectional RNN. The model was trained using the standard GAN loss. Yoon et al. [177] argued that using recurrent networks for the generator and discriminator, and summing the GAN loss over sequences is not enough for capturing the temporal dynamics of the data. They proposed a stepwise supervised loss along with the unsupervised adversarial loss to encourage the model to capture the stepwise temporal dependencies.

3. CAUSAL INFERENCE
In this section, we brieﬂy review the concepts from causal inference used in this paper for causality based time series models. Below are the common methods in calculating the diﬀerence between the outcome of the data with intervention and the control group.
Suppose A is a treatment dummy random variable and Y is the desired outcome random variable, then A can take value a = 1 or a = 0 denoting the presence or absence of a treatment, respectively. In this case, Ya will be deﬁned as the potential outcome under exposure to the treatment (i.e. Ya=1) or under control (i.e. Ya=0). δYa = Ya=1 − Ya=0 denote the individual (or unit) causal eﬀect (ITE) of the treatment.

Deﬁnition 1 (Average Treatment Eﬀect). The average causal eﬀect also known as the average treatment eﬀect of the population can be calculated as follows:

AT E = E[Ya=1 − Ya=0],

(16)

and it is non-zero when the treatment A has a causal eﬀect on the mean of the outcome.

This measure implicitly assumes that the individuals are drawn from a large population. However, due to selection bias, the units might not be representative of such a population. In this case, sample average treatment eﬀect (SATE) will be used that only calculates the treatment eﬀect of the units in that speciﬁc study, which avoids any assumption on the distribution of the samples [18],

Deﬁnition 2 (Sample Average Treatment Eﬀect).

m
SAT E = [Yi,a=1 − Yi,a=0],
i=1

(17)

where m is the number of samples and Yi,a is the outcome of sample i under the treatment a.

On one hand, individual treatment eﬀects in the population might be heterogeneous, meaning that the treatment aﬀects

the individuals or sub-populations diﬀerently. In this case, it is more desirable to consider the conditional average treatment eﬀect (CATE) [4] to calculate the eﬀect of a treatment on the sub-population.

Deﬁnition 3 ( Conditional Average Treatment Eﬀect). In the randomized controlled trial, the Conditional Average Treatment Eﬀect (CATE) is estimated as follows:

CAT E = E[Ya=1 − Ya=0|X = x]

(18)

where X is the covariates (or features) and x is the values that the covariates take.

On the other hand, we might be interested in the causal treatment eﬀects for only those individuals of the population who choose to participate in the treatment. In this case, we can calculate the average treatment eﬀect of the treated (ATT) sub-population as follows:

Deﬁnition 4 (Average Treatment Eﬀect of the Treated).

AT T = E[Ya=1 − Ya=0|A = 1]

(19)

All the above estimators are true if we conduct experiments on randomized trials. However, researchers may only have access to outcome values reported at the aggregate level (observational data). To obtain consistent estimators from observational data, identiﬁability conditions should be hold [132, 65, 66]:

Assumption 1 (Consistency). This assumption indicates that if Ya=1 denotes the potential outcome for the treated subject then its value is known and is equal to the the observed outcome, Y . Although Ya=0 (potential outcome under control) remains unknown. This is also true for the untreated subject. In other words, for the treatment variable A, if A = a, then Ya = Y .

Assumption 2 (Positivity). The probability of receiving every value of treatment conditional on some measured covariates X is greater than zero. In other words, P r[A = a|X = x] > 0 for all values x with P r[X = x] = 0, in the population of interest.

Assumption 3 (Conditional Exchangeability). Un-conditional exchangebility implies that the treatment group, had they been untreated, would have experienced the same distribution of outcomes as the control group. While in conditional exchangebility, the conditional probability of receiving every value of treatment, depends only on measured covariates X, i.e. Ya and A are statistically independent given every possible value for X.

Below we list some common assumptions required to perform causal discovery in observational data.

Assumption 4 (Causal Stationarity). The time series pro-
cess X with graph deﬁned over it is called causally stationary over a time index set T if and only if for all links xt−T i

xt−T i ⊥⊥ .xtj |Xt−\xt−T i holds for all t ∈ T

(20)

Assumption 5 (Causal Suﬃciency). A set of variables is causally suﬃcient for a process, if and only if it includes all common causes of every two pairs in the set.

Assumption 6 (Causal Markov Condition). The joint distribution of a time series process X with graph G fulﬁlls the Causal Markov Condition if and only if for all Yt ∈ Xt with parents PYt in the graph:
Xt−\PYt d-separated Yt|PYt =⇒ Xt−\PYt ⊥⊥ Yt|PYt , (21)

Assumption 7 (Faithfulness). The joint distribution of a time series process X with graph G fulﬁlls the Faithfulness condition if and only if for all disjoint subsets of nodes (or single nodes) A, B, S ⊂ G it holds that

XA ⊥⊥ XB|XS =⇒ A d-separated B|S

(22)

4. CAUSALITY AND TIME SERIES ANALYSIS
In this section we discuss two most important tasks in causal inference for time series data, i.e. causal treatment eﬀect estimation and causal discovery. We ﬁrst explain causal treatment eﬀect estimation problem, classify the existing approaches based on diﬀerent settings given the time and explain the state-of-the-art approaches in each category. We then discuss the task of causal discovery for time series data, categorize the proposed frameworks based on the type of model being used and explain them in detail.
4.1 Causal Treatment Effect Estimation on Time Series
Policymakers often face challenges to assess the impact of an intervention (i.e., a change in policy) on an outcome of interest. For example, a state government wants to estimate the eﬀect of a tobacco control program on cigarette sales using the available data before and after a proposition [1]. There is a need to evaluate both the positive and negative valued consequences of the designed or unintended policies and interventions to ascertain whether they were eﬀective or not. To this end, researchers proposed various methodologies that account for diﬀerent settings based on the time to estimate the treatment eﬀect: (1) time-invariant treatment eﬀect, (2) time-varying treatment eﬀect, and (3) dynamic regimes. In this section, we will introduce the recent developments and existing applications of causal treatment eﬀect estimation based on the aforementioned categories speciﬁcally designed for time series data.
4.1.1 Time-invariant Treatment Effect
A treatment is time-invariant or ﬁxed when it occurs at one speciﬁc point of time and then does not change afterward, for example, a one-dose drug. More formally, let X(t) be the time series outcome recorded at times t = 1, 2, ..., n, and let A be a dichotomous treatment that can take values a = 0 (untreated) or a = 1 (treated). We will have Xa that denotes the potential outcome for the treatment group (when a = 1) or control group (when a = 0). At 1 ≤ T ≤ n an intervention occurs. We are mostly seeking to model the potential outcome of the treatment group at t > T had it not received the treatment (Xa=1 c (t > T )) which is known as the counterfactual outcome. The counterfactual tells us what would have happened in the treatment group had we not applied the policy. The diﬀerence between the observed values for the treatment group (Xa=1(t > T )) and the counterfactual outcome (unobserved values) would give

us an estimation for the treatment eﬀect. This diﬀerence can be reported as a numerical value using measures introduced in section 3 such as ITE, ATE, and ATT. In the following section, we will introduce common time-invariant causal eﬀect estimation methods.
An important tool mostly used by the econometricians to capture the causal eﬀect of the time series data before and after the treatment is diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DiD) [13]. This tool goes by an assumption called common trends or parallel trends [7] that uses the change of the outcome of the control group as a counterfactual for the treatment group in the absence of the treatment. Figure 1 illustrates a hypothetical example of DiD on cigarette sales before and after the tobacco control program. The aim is to see whether this program aﬀected per-capita cigarette sales.

Figure 1: An illustration of the DiD method on a hypothetical example inspired by [1]. The treatment group receives the intervention (e.g. tobacco control program) on the third year. The counterfactual (i.e. the green dotted line) tells us what would have happened in the treatment group had everything evolved as it did in the control group. The diﬀerence between the green dotted line and the blue line after the intervention is the treatment eﬀect. The result shows that the tobacco consumption fell markedly following the tobacco control program.

If t < T and t > T denotes the pre- and post- treatment periods (e.g. T = 3 in Figure 1), respectively, then we can calculate the DiD measure using the ATT metric as follows [12]:

DiD = {E[X(t > T )|A = 1] − E[X(t < T )|A = 1]} (23) −{E[X(t > T )|A = 0] − E[X(t < T )|A = 0]}

A common solution to model the DiD causal eﬀect is to specify a linear regression model for the observed outcome [7]. In case of one intervention and one treatment group we will have:

X = α + βg + γt + δ(g × t) + e,

(24)

where α, β, γ, and δ are the regression coeﬃcients. g is a dummy variable indicating the treatment group (1 for treatment and 0 for the control group), t is a dummy variable deﬁning the pre- or post-treatment periods (0 for before and 1 for after the treatment time), g ×t is the interaction term to count the DiD causal eﬀect with δ being its coeﬃcient, and e is the error term which is independent of other variables.

The parameters of this linear regression can be estimated by the available methods solving regression models such as ordinary least squares (OLS) or gradient descent. Other variations of DiD regression consider settings with various treatments and multiple treatment groups [7, 8], non-linearity assumption for DiD model [12], and two control groups (known as triple diﬀerences) [11, 170]. For a comprehensive survey on this metric, we refer the readers to two studies provided by Lencher [90] and Bertrand et al. [24].
Although in the design of the DiD, a temporal component is used, it has been pointed out that if it ﬁts to highly autocorrelated data, the model underestimates the eﬀect of the intervention [24]. To overcome this problem, Brodersen et al. [29] propose a method named Causal Impact which is widely used for various applications such as the impact of vaccines, the environmental impact of aircraft emissions and aviation fuel tax, and the impact of mobile phone use on brain cancer [32, 55, 162, 163]. This method generalizes the concept of the DiD and structural time-series model to infer the causal impact of a discrete intervention (e.g. the release of a new product). Causal impact learns the relationship between the treatment and control group before any intervention and predicts the counterfactual series after the treatment. This method relies on state-space models as follows [140]:

X(t) = µ(t) + βZ(t) + v(t)

µ(t) = µ(t − 1) + δ(t − 1) + w(t)

(25)

δ(t) = δ(t − 1) + u(t),

where Z(t) is the control time series and is related to the treatment time series (i.e. X(t)) through the β components. v(t), w(t), and u(t) are zero-mean noise variables and µ(t) models the temporal correlation in X(t). The δ(t) component can be thought of as the slope at time t − 1 or the expected increase in µ between times t−1 and t. The model is ﬁtted to the observed data t = 1, 2, ..., T , treating the counterfactual t = T + 1, T + 2, ..., n as unobserved random variables. With these, the model will compute the posterior distribution of the counterfactual time series. The causal eﬀect is estimated by subtracting the predicted from the observed treated time series, which captures the semi-parametric Bayesian posterior distribution. Li and Bu¨hlmann [93, 94] proposed a state-space-based model named Causal Transfer, inspired by Causal Impact, to learn the eﬀect of the treatment in a time series data and capture how it evolves over time in order to transfer it to other time series. Speciﬁcally, after the treatment, we are only able to observe the outcomes under the treatment for one time series and under the control for another one, but not the potential outcome under control for the former and under treatment for the latter. The authors ﬁll the missing outcomes by learning the intervention eﬀect through a state-space model.
Synthetic Control Method (SCM) introduced by Abadie and Gareazabal [2] in 2003 overcomes the problem of ambiguities in the selection of control groups with the aim to estimate the eﬀects of interventions that take place on an aggregate level (such as countries, regions, cities). In this method, we ﬁnd the weight for each control unit such that the weighted average of all these potential control units (named as donor pool ) best resembles the characteristics of the treated unit before the treatment and use the learned weights to estimate the counterfactual after the intervention. Formally, the SCM

ﬁnds the weights by minimizing:

W ∗ = arg min ||Xa=1(t < T ) − Xa=0(t < T )W ||
W

J

(26)

s.t. wi = 1 and wi ≥ 1,

i=1

where Xa=1(t < T ) is a T × 1 treated unit vector and Xa=0(t < T ) is a T × J matrix with J being the number of control units. The predicted counterfactual of the treated unit is calculated by

Xa=1 c (t > T ) = Xa=0(t > T )W ∗

(27)

Other variations such as allowing for multiple treated units [89] and applications of this model [1, 15, 34, 38, 110, 142] have also been conducted by researchers.
In the case when (1) the intervention begins at a known point in time, (2) the outcome changes relatively faster after the intervention or a deﬁned lag, and (3) the outcome lasts long enough to measure [22], a method name Interrupted Time Series (ITS) analysis can be used. Although diﬀerent variations of ITS exist, the standard ITS model is capable of ﬁnding the causal eﬀect of an intervention for only one time series (i.e. when the control unit data is not available). This method is built upon a simple idea that the data generating process would have continued in a similar way in the absence of the intervention, which is a special case of Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD) when the discontinuity happens in time [62, 88]. Therefore, to ﬁnd immediate changes in the outcome value and the change in the trend of the time series in the post-intervention period compared to the preintervention period, “Segmented Regression” is used [118]:

Y = α + βT + γt + δ(T × t) + e,

(28)

where α indicates the baseline level at T = 0, β represents the baseline trend (i.e. pre-intervention trend), γ is the immediate level change following the intervention, and δ indicates the post-intervention trend and e is the error (Figure 2).

Figure 2: An illustration of the Standard ITS method.
Eichler and Didelez [45] proposed a formal deﬁnition of causality along with an identiﬁability criteria for estimating the causal eﬀects based on the intervention in dynamic Bayesian networks. The authors considered the eﬀect of intervention in one component of the multivariate time series, at a speciﬁc point of the time, on another or the same component at later time points. They assumed that the causal eﬀect

excludes instantaneous causality and depends only on past variables. Using graphical models for the time series data, they proposed that if (a, b) is not a directed edge in the graph, then the time series data of component a at time t has no causal eﬀect on time series data of component b at time t + 1. Moreover, if a is not the ancestor of b in the graph, then the time series data of component a at time t has no causal eﬀect of the component b in the future.
4.1.2 Time-varying Treatment Effect
Most treatment eﬀect estimation problems do not ﬁt into the simple dichotomous treatment framework and require multiple sequential treatments which varies according to the time of the treatment [39]. For example, a drug dose when the dose is readjusted according to the patient’s clinical response [127]. In this case, A, the treatment variable, would be time-dependent and is recorded throughout all the time (A(t) = {A(1), A(2), ...A(n)}). Below, we will brieﬂy review the works in this area. Works conducted by Robins et al. [130] as well as Hedeker and Gibbons [65] expand the deﬁnitions of consistency, positivity, and conditional explainability assumptions along with the identiﬁability conditions of the time-invariant treatment eﬀect estimation to estimate the causal eﬀect of time-varying treatments. Moreover, in the presence of time-dependent counfounding, counterfactual inference of a time-dependent treatment has been extensively studied in the epidemiology literature specially in the chain of works conducted by Robin [67, 126, 128, 131] on structural nested models (SNM) and marginal structural modeling (MSM). MSM, which is an alternative to SNM [131], models the potential outcomes associated with each possible treatment trajectory with the inverse probability of treatment weighted (IPTW) estimator [171]. Speciﬁcally, a weight is assigned to each observation proportional to the inverse of the probability of treatment received given time-dependent confounders and previous treatments. The prediction models of these methods are typically based on linear or logistic regression. Therefore, in case the outcome or the treatment policy exhibit complex dependencies on the covariate history, it would output an inaccurate result. To overcome this problem, Lim et al. [97] proposed a deep learning method, Recurrent Marginal Structural Networks (R-MSN), to learn time-dependent eﬀects by using an RNN architecture for treatment response estimation based on the MSM framework. Wodtke [171] suggests an alternative method for estimating marginal eﬀects using regression-with-residuals (RWR) estimation of a constrained structural nested mean models. Unlike IPTW, this method does not require a model for the conditional probability of treatment at each time point making it a good candidate for continuous-valued treatment problems. Another category of approaches to capture the treatment eﬀect of the longitudinal data with time-varying treatment is the Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) methods. Xu et al. [175] used a ﬂexible Bayesian non-parametric approach to estimate the disease trajectories as well as the univariate treatment response curves from sparse observational time series. Inspired by this work, Soleimani et al. [149] used the ﬂexible Bayesian semiparametric approach and linear time-invariant dynamical systems to model the treatment eﬀects in multivariate longitudinal data by capturing the dynamic behavior (i.e. time-varying treatments). Their model composed of three components, one that captures the treatment response

and the other two components models the natural evolution of the signal independent of the treatment.
Most of the aforementioned methods assume that all the confounders are observed. In other words, they consider that variables aﬀecting the treatment assignments and the potential outcomes are all known, otherwise it will lead to a biased estimate of the outcome [25, 102]. A natural way to overcome this problem is through Factor Models [35, 53, 139, 176]. A recent deconfounder method introduced by Bica et al. [25] estimates the individual response to treatments in the presence of the multi-cause hidden confounders. To capture the distribution of the treatments over time a factor model was built to create the latent variables. Moreover, to make sure that this factor model is able to estimate the distribution of the assigned causes, a validation set of subjects were considered in order to compare the similarity of the two test statistics. These hidden confounders modeled by the latent variables were calculated by Recurrent Neural Network with multitask output and variational dropout. Similarly, in the presence of hidden confounders, Liu et al. [101] proposed Deep Sequential Weighting (DSW) for estimating the ITE with time-varying confounders. The authors used deep recurrent weighting neural network to combine the current treatment assignments with historical information and learn a new representation of hidden confonders to predict the potential outcome.

4.1.3 Dynamic Treatment Regimes

With rapid-increasing interest in providing personalized treat-

ment suggestions, dynamic regimes treatments are designed

to provide treatment to individuals only when they need the

treatment. A dynamic treatment regime is a function which

takes in treatment and covariate history as arguments and

outputs an action to be taken, providing a list of decision

rules for how treatment should be allocated over time. Fig-

ure 3 shows a two-stage dynamic treatment regimes, where

X and A denote the categorical covariates and the treatment,

respectively. The observable data trajectory for a participant

in a two-stage treatments is denoted by (X1, A1, X2, A2),

where X1 is the pre-treatment covariates and X2 is the time-

varying covariates which may depend on treatment received

in the ﬁrst interval. The randomized treatment actions are A1

and A2 and the primary outcome is Y = f (X1, A1, X2, A2).

For example, X2(A1) denote a person’s potential covariate

status at the beginning of the second interval if treatment

A1 is received by that person and Y denote the potential

outcome if follows regime (A1, A2).

Regret function is widely used in dynamic treatment regimes

to estimate the eﬀect by the large scale treatments. To learn

the parameters ψ in regret function, Moodie et al. [112]

use g-estimation, which is proposed by Robins [129]. For

the purpose of estimation, Sj(aj) = sj(aj, hj) depends on

variables which are considered as interaction with treatment

to inﬂuence outcome, where hj is unmeasured confounders.

For example, if the function at the second interval is linear,

γ2(h2, a2) = a2(ψ0 + ψ1x1 + ψ2a2 + ψ3x2a1), then the analyst

may

choose

S2(a2)

=

∂ ∂ψ

γ2

(h2

,

a2

)

=

a2(1, x2, a1, x2a1)T .

Let

2
U (ψ, s) = hj(ψ)Sj(aj) − E[Sj(aj)|Hj] (29)

j1

with the probability of being the treated model. E[U (ψ, s)] = 0 is an unbiased estimating equation from which consistent

Figure 3: Dynamic treatment regimes for two intervals. X and A are categorical data, hence the tree-structured illustration [112].
estimates ψˆ of ψ may be found. To avoid estimating the full multivariate distribution of the longitudinal data, Murphy et al. [114] model the multivariate distribution with two groups of parameters to estimate optimal rules. The ﬁrst group of parameters (parameters in the regret functions) will be estimated and used to estimate the optimal rules. The the second group of parameters (most of which are inﬁnite dimensional) are nuisance parameters. Zhu et al. [180] extend Boruvka et al.’s [26] deﬁnition of lagged treatment eﬀect to continuous treatments to deﬁne a weighted advantage function and proposed a novel SNM.
4.2 Causal Discovery for Time Series
One of the fundamental tasks in any ﬁeld of science is to identify the causal relations between diﬀerent phenomena in a system [59, 120, 152]. Researchers are often interested in discovering what causes a phenomenon and how manipulating a phenomenon aﬀects the others. Recently, there has been a proclivity towards creating algorithms for causal discovery on time series data [174, 75, 104]. Causal discovery on time series data is an important task and is often used in diﬀerent ﬁelds of research. For example, determining the causal relations between the aggregated daily stock price and trading volumes or discovering how patient’s records and the prescription of a speciﬁc drug over time are related to each other are types of questions which can be answered by performing causal discovery on time series data. In this section, we provide a comprehensive survey of the frameworks proposed for this task by categorizing them into three main types namely Granger causality and conditional independence based approaches, structural equation based models and deep learning based frameworks and introducing the methods in each category.
4.2.1 Methods based on Granger Causality and Conditional Independence
Granger causality [56] is a popular concept of causality which has been widely used to infer the causal relationships from time series data [10, 44, 68]. The idea behind Granger

causality is that Y Granger causes X if it contains some unique information about X which is not available in X’s past as well as all the information in the universe. In practice, this idea is materialized by investigating whether the prediction of the current value of time series X improves by incorporating Y ’s past into its own past. If so, it is reported that Y Granger causes X and has a causal inﬂuence on it. Vector autoregressive models (VAR), are common ways of modeling this problem:

τmax

Xt =

φ(τ )Xt−τ + et,

τ =1

where Xt = (X1t, ..., Xnt) indicates time series X at time step t, φ(τ ) is the N × N coeﬃcient matrix at lag τ , τmax denotes the maximum time lag, and e represents an independent noise. Using this equation, we say Xi Granger causes Xj with lag τ if any of the coeﬃcients in φji(τ ) is non-zero. This relationship can be shown by Xt−τ i → Xtj which demonstrates the causal link between Xi and Xj at lag τ .
Several VAR based frameworks have been proposed over the years to perform causal discovery on time series. For instance, In [58], authors focus on linear vector autoregressive models along with stationary time series. They claim that adopting VAR model directly to identify the causal relations neglects the possibility of shared structures in the lagged dependencies captured by the causal graph. To address this issue, they propose two new methods based on multi-task learning paradigms and techniques of structured regularizations for learning the G-causality in VARs with leading indicators. The diﬀerence between the two proposed methods is that they follow diﬀerent structural assumptions for the G-causality graphs. The ﬁrst method called SingleCluster VAR (SCVAR) assumes that the leading indicators within the system help predict all the series in the system . This method therefore aims at identifying such indicators; The second method named MultiCluster VAR (MCVAR) assumes that there are diﬀerent indicators for diﬀerent cluster of series and aims to learn the leading indicators as well as the unknown clusters.
Shojaie and Michailidis [147] propose a method for estimating the causal relationships of the time series for the case where number of components (p) is very large compared to the sample size (n). The authors claim that in such cases penalized methods provide higher accuracy. Based on this hypothesis, an extension of the lasso penalty named as truncating lasso penalty is proposed. This framework has two key features. First, it automatically determines the order of the Vector Autoregressive (VAR) models and secondly it performs model simpliﬁcation by reducing the number of covariates in the model. The truncating lasso estimate of the graphical Granger model can be found by solving the following estimation problem for i = 1, ..., p:

argminn−1 XiT −
θt ∈Rp

d X T −tθt 2 + λ
t=1 2

t=1 d Ψt

j=1 p θjt wjt

Ψ1 = 1, Ψt = M I A(t−1) 0<p2β/(T −t) , t ≥ 2

(30)

Where Xit is the i-th column of the design matrix corre-

sponding to t-th time point, M is a large constant, β is the

allowed false negative rate set by the user and θ is the model

parameters.
In [148], authors propose a framework to estimate the coeﬃcients of VAR model when there are many observed variables and short time series. To tackle this scenario, the authors propose a new dimension reduction approach designed for time series. They modify the backward-in-time-selection (BTS) approach for Granger causality. While the original BTS method includes all lags up to the selected order pk for each time series, Xk, the proposed modiﬁcation includes only the lags of each Xk that are selected at each step of the algorithm.
In [5] authors claim that most of the existing works in inferring causal relations from time series data using Granger causality assume that the lag between a cause and an eﬀect is at a ﬁxed time point. To address this problem, they propose a novel method that uses Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) which is a distance measure between two time series along with Granger causality to identify the variable lagged based causality in time series.
Haufe et al. [61] introduce a framework which aims to estimate causal interactions for multivariate time series. The authors argue that, it is more practical to ﬁnd all potential causal relations between all time series at once, rather than ﬁnding the causal relations for each time series pair. They propose a framework that accounts for the fact that there is no causal relation between zi and zj if all the AR coeﬃcients for this certain pair of time series are jointly zero. They propose a sparsiﬁcation technique through statistical testing.
Another way to recover the causal dependencies from times series data is by testing conditional independence relations between variables and their pasts. Conditional independence based frameworks allow the causal graph identiﬁcation under the assumption of time-order, Causal Suﬃciency, Causal Markov Condition and Faithfulness. For example, transfer entropy [144] is an information theoretic approach for causal discovery which can also be considered as the generalized Granger causality [19]. This method checks for conditional independence between Xt−τ i and Xtj given the past (Xt−1, ..., Xt−τ ). One major drawback of this method is that it highly suﬀers from curse of dimensionality. To alleviate this issue, Sun and Bollt [155] and Sun et al. [156] propose a framework based on optimal causation entropy principle. The framework identiﬁes the lagged parents using an iterative procedure which consists of a forward and a backward phase.
Another conditional independence based algorithm for causal discovery is PC algorithm [151]. Even though the original PC algorithm was proposed for general random variables and did not consider the time order of the them, the algorithm can be extended to the scenario where variables are collected chronologically. Entner and Hoyer propose to adopt the Fast Causal Inference (FCI) [150], originally designed for non-temporal data, to infer the causal relations from time series data in the presence of unobserved variables [47]. The advantage of the proposed method over Granger causality is that it also takes the latent variables in to account while identifying causal relations. Recently, a variation of PC algorithm, namely PCMCI algorithm [134] has also been proposed which consists of two steps. In the ﬁrst step, the algorithm adopts PC algorithm to identify parents of Xtj (P (Xtj)) for all Xtj ∈ Xt. It then applies a momentary conditional independence (MCI) test. In [136] the authors propose an extension to the PCMCI algorithm

called PCMCI+ that includes discovery of contemporaneous links along with lagged links.
Chu et al. [37] propose a causal discovery algorithm based on conditional independence which is speciﬁcally designed for nonlinear and stationary time series. The authors introduce two classes of conditional independence tests based on additive model regression to recover the structure of additive non linear time series consistently.
Jangyodsuk et al. [80], propose a novel approach for causal discovery in time series data based on Pearl’s causality where the causal relationships are based on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and the conditional dependencies between the variables. The authors state that the mutual information between an eﬀect and a cause can be incrementally constructed based on the mutual information values between the eﬀect Y and the previously found cases X1:i−1. The ﬁnal output of this method is a causal graph with each time series as a node and the edge weight for each edge is the leading time. Leading time is the diﬀerence in time steps between the occurrence of cause and the occurrence of the eﬀect. The equation for mutual information chain rule is as shown:

N
I (Xi:N ; Y ) = I (Xi; Y | X1:i−1)
i=i
where Y is the eﬀect and Xi : N are its N causes.

4.2.2 Methods Based on Structural Equation Models
Structural Equation Models (SEM) have been long used to perform causal discovery from observational data [178, 146, 33, 70]. One popular form of SEM used for identifying the causal structure is Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic Model (LiNGAM) [146]. This model makes use of Independent Component Analysis (ICA) to identify causal relations in observational data. Unlike Gaussian Processes, LiNGAM is based on using the non gaussianity of the data. The key aspect of this method is that it is possible to identify more of the generating structure when the data is non-gaussian. It can be mathematically represented as :

xi =

bij xj + ei

k(j)<k(i)

(31)

where ei are continuous latent variables that are exogenous and bij are the connection strengths between variables xi and xj and k(i) denotes the causal ordering of xi. The exogenous variables, ei follow Non-Gaussian distributions. In this section, We brieﬂy introduce structural equation based methods for causal discovery speciﬁcally designed for time series data.
In [76], Hyv¨arinen et al. propose a generalized version of LiNGAM which can be considered as a combination of autoregressive models and non-Gaussian instantaneous models as deﬁned in equation below:

k

x(t) = Bτ x(t − τ )e(t)

(32)

τ =0

where ei(t) are random processes which model disturbance.
This model allows estimating instantaneous eﬀects (i.e., Xti → Xtj) as well as lagged eﬀects which is shown to lead to a better estimation of causal structure. The parameters of
the model are estimated using a 3-step process by estimating

an autoregressive model, computing the residuals and performing LiNGAM analysis on them. The paper also shows that the model is identiﬁable. Schaechtle et al. [143] propose to integrate Linear NonGaussian Acyclic Model (LiNGAM) with tensor analytic techniques to identify causal relationships from the high dimensional data. Rothenh¨ausler et al. [133] extend LiNGAM to learn linear causal cyclic models in the presence of latent variables. The authors explore the setting where the equilibrium data of a model is observed which is characterized by a set of linear relations Eq.(31).

CP (B) =

max

Bmk+1 ,mk

(m1,...,mη ,mη+1)1<η≤p cycle 1≤k≤η

(33)

where B is the connectivity matrix. For their experiments,

they assume that the data in an environment j are equilib-

rium observations of the model

xj = Bxj + cj + ej

(34)

where cj is the random intervention shift. Given these locations, the interventions shift the variables by a value determined by cj. Σc,j is a diagonal matrix which is equivalent to demanding that interventions at diﬀerent variables are uncorrelated. The ﬁnal output of the model is the estimated connectivity matrix Bˆ.
In [71], authors propose a time-varying causal model to represent the underlying causal process in nonstationary time series. The authors assume that the time series in consideration are generated from the LiNGAM process. They further allow each causal coeﬃcient bij,t and noise variance σi,t 2 to change over time which are modelled using the following autoregressive models:

bij,t = αij,0 + hi,t = βi,0 +

p=1 pl αij,pbij,t−p + ij,t q=1 ql βi,q hi,t−q + ηi,t

(35)

where ij,t ∼ N (0, wij ) , ηi,t N (0, vi) , and hi,t = log σi,t 2

models the volatility of the observed time series. The authors

further state that, the time-varying linear causal model is

actually a speciﬁc type of nonlinear state-space model with

respect to hidden variables bij and hi. The causal graph

is determined from the sampled particles. To determine

whether there is a causal edge from xj to xi , the authors

check both the mean and the variance of ˆbij,t. Speciﬁcally, if

both

ˆbij

=

1 T

Tˆ t=1 bij,t

<α

and

1 T

2

T t=1

ˆbij,t − ˆbij

< α,

then there is no causal edge between xj and xi.

Peters et al. [119] propose a class of structural equation

models called Time Series Models with Independent Noise

(TiMINo) for identifying the causal structure of a time series.

The authors provide both theoretical analysis which provides

general identiﬁability results and practical solution which

introduces an algorithm based on testing the independence

of the residuals for the case where there are no feedback

loops between time series.

4.2.3 Deep Learning based methods
In this section we brieﬂy review the causal discovery frameworks which utilize the power of deep neural networks to perform causal discovery on time series data and overcome

the shortcomings of traditional time series causal discovery frameworks.
Methods on Granger causality are built upon linearity of time series. However, in real world cases dependencies among time series are usually non linear and ignoring such interactions could lead to inconsistent estimation of Granger causality [160]. To incorporate non linear interactions into Granger causality detection, Tank et al. [158] propose a class of non linear architectures such as Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) in which, each time series is modeled using an MLP or RNN. The input to the non linear framework is the past lags of all series and the output is the future value of a single series. The authors also leverage a group lasso penalty to further shrink the weights of the inputs to zero. Dang et al. [43] propose a deep learning based framework which consists of multiple customized gated recurrent units (GRUs) designed to discover nonlinear and inter-time series dependencies. More speciﬁcally, the paper introduces a new dual purpose recurrent neural network which models the lagged dependencies in each time series and leverages those to discover inter-timeseries dependencies. In [172], the authors introduce a novel minimum predictive information regularization method to infer causal relations from time series, allowing deep learning models to discover nonlinear causal relations. This work makes two assumptions regarding the causality. First is the causal suﬃciency assumption which states that each time series x(i) can only be caused by the time series from x(1), x(2), ...x(N). The second assumption is the “causality in mean” assumption which states that the causal relations inﬂuence the mean value of other variables. Their model tries to answer the question, how much can Xt−1 (j) be corrupted without making the prediction of xt(i) noticeably worse? To do so, they take the input and add independent noise with learnable amplitudes and measure the extent of corruption by mutual information between input and corrupted output.
The risk for the mentioned situation can be given by:

RX,x(i) [fθ , η] = EXt−1,x(i) t ,

(i) ˜ (η) 2 xt − fθ Xt−1

N
+λ· I
j=1

˜ (j)(ηj ) (j) Xt−1 ; Xt−1

(36)

˜ (η) where Xt−1 := Xt−1 + η

˜ (j)(ηj ) ( or element-wise , Xt−1 :=,

Xt−1 (j) + ηj · j, j = 1, 2, . . . N is the noise-corrupted inputs

with learnable noise amplitudes ηj ∈ RKM , and j ∼ N (0, I).λ >

0 is a positive hyperparameter for the mutual information

I(·, ·).

At the minimization of RX,x(i) [fθ, η], Wji is deﬁned as Wji =

˜ (j)(ηj∗) (j) I Xt−1 ; Xt−1 , which is known as minimum predictive

information and it measures the predictive strength of time series j for predicting time series i, conditioned on all other observed time series.
Most existing methods in causal discovery rely on predeﬁned kernels or data distributions. To relax such assumptions, Xu et al. [174] propose a scalable causal discovery algorithm based on deep neural network. The proposed framework consists of four modules which account for temporal non linearity, learning the causal graph, identifying the intervari-

able non linearity and performing prediction for Xt in the framework of Granger causality. In order to make the framework more scalable, the authors also propose to approximate the causal graph via k-rank matrix decomposition. In [116], the authors propose a hypernetwork framework for learning the intrinsic causality between spatial and temporal attributes to enhance the prediction performance of spatial temporal networks. They show that the spatial characteristics have a huge inﬂuence on the temporal characteristics and in order to capture this inﬂuence they use a hypernetwork. Most of the aforementioned approaches are based on causal suﬃciency assumption and therefore do not consider unobserved confounders. In such cases, observed confounders can be taken into account by controlling for them using for instance conditional Granger test [96]. However, in most real-world scenarios we cannot expect to have all possible confounders measured. Meng [108] addresses the problem of unobserved confounder in non linear Granger causality based methods by approximating the distribution of unobserved confounders using Variational autoencoder. This distribution is sampled to get the estimated counfounders which are used in the Granger test.
5. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we present an overview of the benchmark datasets and metrics used in time series and causal time series literature. The datasets and metrics that are used for evaluation are based on the type of models that we are evaluating . The fact that causal time series analysis targets a diﬀerent problem than traditional time series modelling, means that there are a lot more datasets available for time series which do not have causal metadata.
5.1 Datasets
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce some of the datasets used in causal inference literature on time series. First, we begin by introducing datasets for the traditional time series forecasting. The functionalities of these datasets cannot be exploited for learning causality in time series as some datasets may lack ground truth information or may lack other features necessary for causal inference. To deal with these issues we introduce datasets speciﬁcally catered for the causal discovery problem as well as the treatment eﬀect estimation problems.
5.1.1 Time Series Datasets
Traditionally, time series analysis uses a variety of data. In this section, we discuss some of the most commonly used datasets for traditional time series problem.
• UCR Time Series Classiﬁcation Archive: The UCR Time Series Classiﬁcation archive consists of more than 120 datasets. These datasets, represent a classiﬁcation problem. Thus, there is a class label for each item in every dataset. The UCR time series dataset is used in various publications [48, 17, 173].
• Baydogan’s Archive: Baydogan’s Archive consists of over a dozen diverse multivariate time series datasets from diﬀerent applications such as speech recognition, activity recognition, medicine and etc. This dataset is used and introduced in [21].

• NYC Taxi Dataset: This is a univariate time-series dataset containing the New York City (NYC) taxi demand from 2014-–07–01 to 2015–01–31 with an observation of the number of passengers recorded every half hour containing 10320 timestamps. This dataset is recommended by Braei et al. [28].
• Real Yahoo Services Network Traﬃc Dataset: This is a univariate time-series dataset containing the traﬃc to Yahoo services. The anomalies are labeled by humans. This dataset consists of 67 diﬀerent timeseries each containing about 1400 timestamps. This dataset is recommended by Braei et al. [28].
• Synthetic Yahoo Services Network Traﬃc Dataset: This dataset consists of 100 synthetic univariate timeseries data containing anomalies. Each time-series contains about 1421 timestamps. The anomalies have been inserted randomly therefore representing point anomalies. This dataset is recommended by Braei et al. [28].
As mentioned earlier, these datasets are fruitful when it comes to traditional time series problems, like classiﬁcation and forecasting. For inferring causality, one may need access to treatment and control groups for treatment eﬀect estimation and may need access to variables such as confounders to interpret correct causal relations between diﬀerent variables. Thus, the traditional datasets cannot be used for inferring causality as they lack these features. We now introduce datasets relevant for treatment eﬀect estimation and causal discovery problems.
5.1.2 Treatment Effect Estimation Datasets
In this section, we discuss some of the commonly used real world datasets for the treatment eﬀects estimation problem.
• MIMIC II/III Data [81]: This dataset consists of data about patients in ICU. Various attributes about the patients are stored in this database. Examples include blood pressure, oxygen saturation, given medicine, as well as temporal attributes. Thus, it is a gold-mine for causal research.This dataset has been used by Bica et al. [25] to estimate treatment eﬀects. The dialysis subset of this data has been used by Soleimani et al. for Treatment-Response modeling using counterfactual reasoning [149].
• Advertisement Data: Brodersen et al. [29] use advertisement data by Google to determine the causal impact. An advertisement campaign was analyzed by the authors where the product ads were placed alongside search results for a period time of 6 weeks. The ad data was used as an intervention to measure the impact on sale volume as the eﬀect.
• Geo experiment data [85]: This data consists of an ad campaign as a treatment for half of the nonoverlapping geo data in the sample. It was used by [93] for experiments in their approach.
• Economic data for Spanish regions: In a case study about the economic cost of conﬂict [2] use economic data for Spanish regions to analyze the eﬀects of terrorism. The authors use the per capita GDP of

Model Confounding Non-linear
Dynamic Time dence Chaotic

depen-

Description Multiple eﬀects from the same cause Absence of a linear relationship between cause and eﬀect Dependence on the time-lagged component(s) varies over time Small changes in parameters create large changes over time

Datasets Bica et al. [25] Financial Time-Series [87], Particle Simulation [104] Li et al. [93]
Papana et al. [117], Khanna et al. [86]

Table 1: Properties of synthetic datasets used in literature

Basque over time to do their causal analysis. The data does not have a ground truth value.
• California’s Tobacco Control Program: Another work looks at the eﬀects of California’s tobacco control program in their work using Synthetic Control Methods [1]. Here they use annual state-level panel data. This data contains the per-capita cigarette sales from 19702000 for multiple US states. This is the time between which Proposition 99 was passed.
• Air Quality Data [14]: This dataset is used to study the eﬀects of gasoline content on air quality. This dataset includes Ozone levels, minimum/maximum/mean temperatures, precipitation, and snow information. The data goes over the years 1989 till 2006.
• Monetary Policy Data: This dataset comes from three diﬀerent sources. Quarterly GDP for Switzerland and Euro are taken from Eurostat. The monthly business conﬁdence index and monthly consumer price index for Switzerland are taken from OECD. Monthly balance sheet data, monthly call money rate, and monthly average exchange rate are taken from the Swiss National Bank. Pﬁster et al. [121] use this dataset to satisfy their goal of ﬁnding monthly causal predictors for log-returns of the Euro-Swiss franc exchange rate. The authors use data from the year 1999 to 2017.
5.1.3 Causal Discovery Datasets
Datasets for causal discovery range from economical data [54] to health data [143]. We discuss some of the commonly used real world datasets.
• US Manufacturing Growth Data: This dataset consists of microeconomic data of growth rates of US manufacturing ﬁrms in terms of employment, sales, research & development (R&D) expenditure, and operating income, for the years 1973–2004. It can be used to identify the causal variables that aﬀect the growth rate of a ﬁrm. It has been used in [47].
• Diabetes Dataset: This dataset consists of Diabetes patient records that were obtained from two sources: an automatic electronic recording device and paper records. [143] use it to deduce the ground truth causal graph.
• Temperature Ozone Data: This dataset consists of two variables, 72 points in time, 16 diﬀerent places. The two variables are ozone and radiation with the assumed ground truth that radiation has an causal eﬀect on ozone. This dataset was used by [143, 54, 113].

• OHDNOAA Dataset: This is a dataset by the Oﬃce of Hydrologic Development at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration which consists of 32 hydrology related variables over several square areas for the US. The data is collected at constant intervals of 6 hours and ranged from the years 1979 to 2008. It is used by [80].
• Neural activity Dataset: This dataset consists of real-time whole-brain imaging to record the neural activity of Caenorhabditis elegans. The dataset consists of 302 neurons and is generally used to identify which neurons are responsible for movement.
• Human Motion Capture: This dataset is from CMU MoCap database contains data about joint angles, body position from two subjects. The dataset contains 54 joint angles over 2024 time points. Tank et al. [158] use this dataset in their Causal Discovery work.
• Traﬃc Prediction Dataset: This dataset contains four months’ worth of sensor data from Los Angeles, California. 207 sensors are placed for collecting this data. The location of each sensor in the form of GPS coordinates are also included in the dataset. It is used by [116].
• Stock Indices Data: Stock Indices are a source of data used in Causal work. Rothenhausler et al. use NASDAQ, S&P 500, and DAX indices for a period between 2000-2012 for their Causal Discovery work [133]. They create 74 blocks of data. Each block represents 61 consecutive days.
5.1.4 Synthetic Datasets
Even though the real world datasets exist to solve the causal discovery and the treatment eﬀect estimation problems, many researchers use synthetic datasets for the purpose of illustrating particular technical diﬃculties inherent to some causal models e.g. Markov equivalence (several causal graphs are consistent with the same data). The truth values of causal relationships are known for such data generating models. In the following section we discuss some synthetic dataset generation methods and some works that use them. A summary of the synthetic models is presented in Table 1.
• Confounding/ Common-cause Models: One of the concerns in causal literature is the eﬀect or discovery of confounders. Thus, in order to model them, there are several approaches in the literature. Huang et al. use simulated datasets with a common cause and common eﬀect [72]. The datasets contain noise variables and causal variables over time. Let e(t) be the value of a

variable e at time t. Let c represent the variable which causes e. Then:

n

e(t) =

I(c, e)

c∈X i=1

where c is the coupling strength. Variations of the Lorenz model is used in other places in causal inference for time series. The Lorenze-96 model is used in the work by Khanna et al. [86] where the authors mention it as a popular model for climate science.

where n = |T (c) ∩ [t − s, t − r]| and I(c, e) is the impact of c on e.

5.2 Evaluation Metrics
In this section, we go over diﬀerent metrics used in the

• Non-Linear Models: Since many real-world systems are non-linear, there are works which try to simulate non-linear systems to evaluate their approach. An example of non-linear model is the simulation used by Papana et al. [117]. In their work, they simulate

literature for measuring how well a model performs. We begin by covering the metrics used for traditional time series problems like forecasting and classiﬁcation. We then move on to metrics designed for causal discovery followed by the metrics for treatment eﬀect estimation problem.

a tri-variate system with linear(X2 → X3) and nonlinear(X1 → X2, X1 → X3) relationships:
x1,t = 3.4x1,t−1(1 − x1,t−1)2 exp(−x1,t−1 2 ) + 0.4 1,t

5.2.1 Time Series Metrics
There are multiple time series metrics used in the literature [16, 48, 99]. In the following we discuss some of the most

x2,t = 3.4x2,t−1(1 − x2,t−1)2 exp(−x2,t−1 2 ) + 0.5x1,t−1x2,t−1 common ones.

+ 0.4 2,t x3,t = 3.4x3,t−1(1 − x3,t−1)2exp(−x3,t−1 2 ) + 0.3x2,t−1
+ 0.5x1,t−1 2 + 0.4 3,t

• Accuracy: One of the common metrics for validating time series classiﬁcation models is accuracy. The accuracy is simply the percentage of samples that are correctly classiﬁed.[48, 99].

where i,t, i = 1, ..., 3 are Gaussian white noise processes. There are various other works which use nonlinear models of data [104].
• Dynamic Models: Some models try to simulate a situation where the dependence of the variables vary over time in a non-linear and non-exponential manner. An example is the model used by Li et al. [93] where there is a sinusoidal dependence:
Xt = cos(Xt−1+Xt−4)+log(|Xt−6−Xt−10|+1)+ t

• Mean/Median Error: There are several variations of errors used in time series literature, particularly for time series forecasting [74] such as (Root) Mean Squared Error, Mean/Median Absolute Error, Mean/ Median Absolute Percentage Error, Symmetric Mean/ Median Absolute Percentage Error, Median Relative Absolute Error, Geometric Mean Relative Absolute Error, and Mean Absolute Scaled Error. All of these are intended to measure the diﬀerences between the forecasted time series and the ground truth.

For treatment eﬀects, one of the examples of a model used in literature is deﬁned as follows [85]:
Xi,t = β0,t+β1,tXi,pre+β2,tZi,t+Tiµi,t cos(Xi,pre)+vi,t
where Z is the time-varying covariate, vi,t is the noise, Xi,pre is the pre-treatment covariate, Ti is the treatment indicator and µi,t represents the state.
• Chaotic Models: Choaticity is the ability of a model to deviate over diﬀerent values of its hyperparameters. Chaoticity is usually expressed in terms of a Lorenz model. One of the examples of such a model which is also non-linear with X1 → X2 and X2 → X3 can be expressed as follows [117]:
x˙ 1 = 10(y1 − x1) x˙ 2 = 10(y2 − x2) + c(x1 − x2) x˙ 3 = 10(y3 − x3) + c(x2 − x3)
y˙1 = 28x1 − y1 − x1z1 y˙2 = 28x2 − y2 − x2z2 y˙3 = 28x3 − y3 − x3z3

• Longest Common SubSequence: The LCS [16] measures the similarity of two time series with a matching threshold θ. A threshold θ is used to determine the state of match or mismatch between two time series. If the Euclidean distance of two data points is not greater than θ, then the two data points are considered to be a match, else they are said to mismatch.
• Edit Distance with Real Penalty: In this metric, the distance between the two series is measured by looking at the number of operations required to change one series into the other series. A distance matrix is created which stores the distances between the two time series across multiple time points inside the time window. Gaps between points are penalized according to a user-provided reference value [36].
• Euclidean Distance: One of the simplest evaluation metrics for time series is the Euclidean Distance (ED) [77]. Given two series, the square root of the sum of squared distances between each time step is the euclidean distance. It helps deﬁne the similarity between two independent time series and is suitable for applications that do not present direct or necessary correlation among distinct features.

z˙1 = x1y1 − 8/3z1 z˙2 = x2y2 − 8/3z2 z˙3 = x3y3 − 8/3z3

• Dynamic Time Warping: The dynamic time warping (DTW) [23] is a metric for calculating the distance between two time series sequences. Suppose two sequences of time series A = a1, a2 . . . , am and

Correctness Comparative Signiﬁcance

Metric Name

Notions

Deﬁnition

Commonly Used in

1 TPR
2 FPR
3 MSE 6 Precision 7 Recall 8 F1-Score 9 F-Test 10 Unpaired
T-Test

Let G = (V, EM ) be the causal graph inferred by the model, where VM = {v1, v2, ..., vn} represent the covariates (including time-lagged) and EM represent the edges between the covariates if there is a direct causal dependence. Similarly, let G = (V, EGT ) represent the covariates and the edges in the ground truth. Let E = {e1, e2, ..., em} represent all pLoestsiTblebeedtghees bineftewrereend Vtr.ansition matrix and A be the adjacency matrix for the ground truth. Let T P and F P denote the True Positive and False Positive, respectively. Let T P and F N denote the True Positive and False Negative, respectively. Let P and R be the precision and recall, respectively Let RSS0 = t=1 T eˆt and RSS1 =
t=1 T uˆt, where T is the length of the time series, eˆt and uˆt is the time dependent error for the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis, respectively. Let x¯1 and x¯2 be the means of two sequences. Let s1 and s2 represent the standard deviation of the sequences. Let n1 and n2 represent the cardinalities of the sequences.

T P R = |EGT | ei , ei ∈ EM ∩ EGT
i
F P R = |E−EGT | ei , ei ∈ EM \EGT
i

M SE = 1 |T | (T − A)◦2

P recision

=

TP T P +F P

Recall = T P T P +F N F1 = P +R 2P R

F = (RSS0−RSS1)/p RSS1/(T −2p−1)

utt =

x¯1 −x¯2

( 1 + 1 )( (n1−1)s21+(n2−1)s22 )

n1 n2

(n1 −1)+(n2 −1)

Table 2: Causal time series metrics and their deﬁnition.



   



Causal Discovery
Causal Discovery
Both Causal Discovery Causal Discovery Causal Discovery
Both
Treatment Eﬀect
Estimation

B = b1, b2, . . . bn are given then, let DTW(i, j) denote the DTW distance of A1..i and B1..j . The distance function dis(ai, bj ) represents the distance of ai and bj. The Euclidean distance is usually used to measure the distance between ai and bj.
5.2.2 Causal Time Series Evaluation Metrics
In this section we discuss diﬀerent metrics for the evaluation of causality in time series. We ﬁrst, introduce metrics for the causal discovery problem followed by the metrics for the causal treatment eﬀect estimation. A summary of the metrics can be found in Table 2.
5.2.2.1 Treatment Effect Estimation Metrics.
When we talk about metrics for treatment eﬀect estimation, we refer to those metrics that give feedback on how successful a model was in estimating a speciﬁc value. For causal eﬀect

estimation, the metrics which are used, give us information about how well the estimation compares to the ground truth.
• MSE: MSE and its variations (Root Mean Squared Error [116], Normalized Root Mean Squared Error [149]) are used commonly in causal eﬀect estimation literature [25, 85]. Unlike MSE for causal discovery, here MSE is used to compare the inferred series with the ground truth series by taking the average of the squared diﬀerences at each time step.
• F-Test: F-test are used in treatment eﬀect estimation to asses treatment eﬀect heterogeneity by examining the marginal variances of the treatment and control outcomes. It is deﬁned as the ratio of variance for the treated group over the variance for the control group.
• T-Test: The t-test is a metric used to compare two sequences. In their work on causal inference with rare

time series data, Kleinberg et al. [87] use an unpaired t-test to determine the signiﬁcance of a cause within a certain time-range.
5.2.2.2 Causal Discovery Metrics.
Here we explain diﬀerent metrics used in the literature for causal discovery. causal discovery mainly focuses on ﬁnding the causal relationships [47, 134], so the metrics involved in this type of approach usually provide measures of correctly identiﬁed relationships. Below, we list some of the commonly used metrics for this task:
• Structural Hamming Distance: Structural Hamming Distance (SHD) is a metric used to compare a discovered causal graph with the ground truth. More speciﬁcally, SHD describes the number of changes that need to be made to a graph to turn it into the graph its being compared with. This is calculated by counting the missing edges, extra edges and incorrect edge direction between two graphs. To asses the performance of causal discovery methods, SHD takes as input two partially directed acyclic graphs (PDAGs) and outputs the count of edges that do not coincide using the aforementioned process.
• True/False Positive Rate: The True Positive Rate for both adjacencies (discovered neighbors) and arrowheads (direction of discovered causal relations) are deﬁned as the ratio of common edges found in the predicted and the ground truth adjacencies over the number of edges in the ground truth graph. It take as input the predicted adjacency matrix and the ground truth adjacency matrix to calculate the ratio. Similarly, the False Positive Rate refers to the ratio of common edges found in the predicted and ground truth adjacencies over the absolute diﬀerence of number of edges between ground truth and predicted adjacencies. These metrics have been used in [75, 134, 135, 143].
• Area Under the Receiver Operator Curve: This measure is one of the most popular metrics for Causal Discovery. The Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) is deﬁned as a ratio of True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR). The ROC curve is created by iterating over the cut oﬀ for classiﬁcation and recording the TPR against the FPR. The area under the ROC curve (AUROC) is then used to asses the performance of the model. The higher the value of this metric, the better the model is. This metric has been widely used in diﬀerent papers such as [61, 86, 104, 172, 174]. For Instance, in [86], the ROC curve illustrates the trade oﬀ between the TPR and the FPR achieved by the diﬀerent methods towards the detection of pairwise Granger causal relationships between the n measured processes in their experiment.
• Mean Squared Error: This metric is used to evaluate works in causal discovery and for example, in Temporally Aggregated Time Series [54], the authors construct a transition matrix to represent the causal graph. Here, the MSE between the distance from the transition matrix to the ground truth is used to evaluate the causal relationships inferred by the proposed model.

• F-Score, Precision and Recall: Precision is deﬁned as the ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the total predicted positive observations. Recall is deﬁned as the ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the all observations in the actual class. F1 Score is deﬁned as the weighted average of Precision and Recall. They are commonly used to evaluate the performance of a model. It take as input the predicted adjacency matrix and the ground truth adjacency matrix to calculate the true positives, false negatives, true negatives and false negatives.

• Area Under the Precision Recall Curve: Area Under the Precision Recall Curve (AUPR) is another metric used in literature [158, 174]. This metric relies on precision and recall. Similar to the AUROC, this metric measures the area under the Precision-Recall curve.

• F-Test: One approach to ﬁnding whether causality exists is the F-test. To use this test the user ﬁrst deﬁnes a null hypothesis, for example in [117] the null hypothesis is, the coeﬃcients of the lagged driving variables in the unrestricted VAR model are all zero . Then, we can construct a restricted and unrestricted equation and estimate the hyper-parameters using Ordinary Least Squares.

Deﬁnition 5 (F-Test). Let X = {xt, xt−1, xt−2, ...} be one series. Let Y = {yt, yt−1, yt−2, ...} be another series. The null hypothesis is given by the restricted equation:

p
xt = c1 + γixt−i + et
i=1

(37)

Where p is the lag, c1 is the intercept and et is the timedependent error. The unrestricted equation represents the alternative hypothesis:

p

p

xt = c2 + αixt−i + βiyt−i + ut

i=1

i=1

(38)

Where p is the lag, c2 is the intercept and ut is the timedependent error. Let RSS0 = t=1 T eˆt and RSS1 =
t=1 T uˆt, where T is the length of the time series. The F-test statistic is deﬁned as:

F = (RSS0 − RSS1)/p (39) RSS1/(T − 2p − 1)

6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of causal inference tasks for time series data. We ﬁrst categorize traditional ways of modeling this type of data and discuss state-of-the-arts in each category. We then discuss two of the most important causal inference tasks on time series, i.e. causal treatment eﬀect estimation and causal discovery. Each of these tasks is classiﬁed based on the type of approaches proposed to solve the problem and for each category, state-of-the-arts are discussed. We also provide an extensive list of datasets and evaluation metrics used to assess the performance of frameworks proposed for diﬀerent tasks. These metrics and datasets can be used as a guideline for future research in this ﬁeld. Lastly, in the following,

we discuss some future research opportunities in terms of estimating treatment eﬀects, causal discovery and evaluating the performance of the models for each task. Causal Treatment Eﬀect Estimation: Most of the methods in this task are base on the Stable Unit Treatment Values Assumption (SUTVA) which is that the potential outcome is not aﬀected by exposure to the treatment of other units and there is no hidden variations of treatment. However, in many ﬁelds of research such as social science, friends, families and acquaintances have inﬂuence on subjects’ awareness of treatment and their desire to follow it [79]. Hence, there is a need to provide methods that account for social network and peer-inﬂuence both in participation decisions and in determining a subject’s outcomes. Moreover, existing methods usually model treatments as discrete events. However, some treatments, for example dialysis or intravenous diuretics [149], are carried out continuously over a period of time. Therefore designing methods for estimating the eﬀect of continuous-time and continuous-valued treatments is a direction that needs to be explored. Causal Discovery: Most exiting methods in causal discovery, especially methods based on deep neural networks, rely on the concept of Granger causality. Pearl’s causality is another concept of causality which has been widely popular in i.i.d data scenarios [46, 64, 107]. One promising direction to pursue in future research on causal discovery for time series data is to utilize the power of deep neural networks to learn the causal structure from time series data. Moreover, most exiting algorithms in time series ﬁeld only leverage observational data. Interventional data has proven to be extremely useful in learning more accurate causal structures from i.i.d data [40, 153, 30]. We therefore suggest leveraging both observational and interventional time series data to learn a better and more accurate causal structure . Performance Evaluation and Benchmark Datasets: In terms of data, both treatment eﬀect estimation and causal discovery tasks need to include more robust datasets for evaluation purposes. For example, in causal discovery, we need datasets to evaluate multi modal causal discovery algorithms when one of the modalities is time. Multimodal data, have gained a lot of attention in various ﬁelds like healthcare [9] and ﬁnancial [91], thus promoting the need for such datasets for evaluation. Multimodal data represents data of diﬀerent types like images, text, etc. For example, satellite images of a scene taken over diﬀerent time represents multimodal data. When it comes to treatment eﬀect estimation, there is a need for datasets that are suitable for calculating the counterfactual outcomes along with the factual outcomes as they help in estimating the individual treatment eﬀects which would help personalize the eﬀect of a treatment on each individual rather than considering an average population. Most of the datasets mentioned in the earlier section are generated from observational studies and its impossible to obtain both factual and counterfactual outcomes in such a setting. There have been works like [78, 103], that use constructed data which is a mix of observational and randomized control trials (RCT) to overcome this diﬃculty. We need more such data for better evaluation of treatment eﬀect estimation.
References
[1] Alberto Abadie, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. “Synthetic control methods for comparative

case studies: Estimating the eﬀect of California’s tobacco control program”. In: Journal of the American statistical Association 105.490 (2010), pp. 493–505.
[2] Alberto Abadie and Javier Gardeazabal. “The economic costs of conﬂict: A case study of the Basque Country”. In: American economic review 93.1 (2003), pp. 113–132.
[3] Amaia Abanda, Usue Mori, and Jose A Lozano. “A review on distance based time series classiﬁcation”. In: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 33.2 (2019), pp. 378–412.
[4] Jason Abrevaya, Yu-Chin Hsu, and Robert P Lieli. “Estimating conditional average treatment eﬀects”. In: Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 33.4 (2015), pp. 485–505.
[5] Chainarong Amornbunchornvej, Elena Zheleva, and Tanya Y Berger-Wolf. “Variable-lag Granger Causality for Time Series Analysis”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA). IEEE. 2019, pp. 21–30.
[6] Christophe Andrieu, Arnaud Doucet, and Roman Holenstein. Particle Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. 2010.
[7] Joshua D Angrist and J¨orn-Steﬀen Pischke. Mastering’metrics: The path from cause to eﬀect. Princeton University Press, 2014.
[8] Joshua D Angrist and J¨orn-Steﬀen Pischke. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s companion. Princeton university press, 2008.
[9] Abdul Rauf Anwar et al. “Multi-modal causality analysis of eyes-open and eyes-closed data from simultaneously recorded EEG and MEG”. In: 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE. 2014, pp. 2825– 2828.
[10] Andrew Arnold, Yan Liu, and Naoki Abe. “Temporal causal modeling with graphical granger methods”. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 2007, pp. 66–75.
[11] Vladimir A Atanasov and Bernard S Black. “Shockbased causal inference in corporate ﬁnance and accounting research”. In: Critical Finance Review 5 (2016), pp. 207–304.
[12] Susan Athey and Guido W Imbens. “Identiﬁcation and inference in nonlinear diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences models”. In: Econometrica 74.2 (2006), pp. 431–497.
[13] Susan Athey and Guido W Imbens. “The state of applied econometrics: Causality and policy evaluation”. In: Journal of Economic Perspectives 31.2 (2017), pp. 3–32.
[14] Maximilian Auﬀhammer and Ryan Kellogg. “Clearing the air? The eﬀects of gasoline content regulation on air quality”. In: American Economic Review 101.6 (2011), pp. 2687–2722.
[15] Hu¨seyin Aytug˘ et al. “Twenty years of the EU-Turkey customs union: A synthetic control method analysis”. In: JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 55.3 (2017), pp. 419–431.

[16] A Bagnall et al. “The great time series classiﬁcation bake oﬀ: An experimental evaluation of recently proposed algorithms. Extended version. arXiv 2016”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.01711 ().
[17] Anthony Bagnall et al. “Time-Series Classiﬁcation with COTE: The Collective of Transformation-Based Ensembles”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 27 (Sept. 2015), pp. 1–1. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2015.2416723.
[18] Laura B Balzer, Maya L Petersen, and Mark J van der Laan. “Targeted estimation and inference for the sample average treatment eﬀect”. In: (2015).
[19] Lionel Barnett, Adam B Barrett, and Anil K Seth. “Granger causality and transfer entropy are equivalent for Gaussian variables”. In: Physical review letters 103.23 (2009), p. 238701.
[20] Leonard E. Baum et al. “A Maximization Technique Occurring in the Statistical Analysis of Probabilistic Functions of Markov Chains”. In: Ann. Math. Statist. 41.1 (Feb. 1970), pp. 164–171. doi: 10.1214/aoms/ 1177697196. url: https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/ 1177697196.
[21] Mustafa Gokce Baydogan and George Runger. “Learning a symbolic representation for multivariate time series classiﬁcation”. In: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 29.2 (2015), pp. 400–422.
[22] James Lopez Bernal, Steven Cummins, and Antonio Gasparrini. “Interrupted time series regression for the evaluation of public health interventions: a tutorial”. In: International journal of epidemiology 46.1 (2017), pp. 348–355.
[23] Donald J. Berndt and James Cliﬀord. “Using Dynamic Time Warping to Find Patterns in Time Series”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. AAAIWS’94. Seattle, WA: AAAI Press, 1994, 359–370.
[24] Marianne Bertrand, Esther Duﬂo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “How much should we trust diﬀerences-indiﬀerences estimates?” In: The Quarterly journal of economics 119.1 (2004), pp. 249–275.
[25] Ioana Bica, Ahmed M Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. “Time Series Deconfounder: Estimating Treatment Eﬀects over Time in the Presence of Hidden Confounders”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00450 (2019).
[26] Audrey Boruvka et al. “Assessing time-varying causal eﬀect moderation in mobile health”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 113.523 (2018), pp. 1112–1121.
[27] G. E. P. Box and G. M. Jenkins. “Some Recent Advances in Forecasting and Control”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C 17.2 (June 1968), pp. 91–109. doi: 10.2307/2985674. url: https:// ideas . repec . org / a / bla / jorssc / v17y1968i2p91 109.html.
[28] Mohammad Braei and Sebastian Wagner. Anomaly Detection in Univariate Time-series: A Survey on the State-of-the-Art. Apr. 2020.

[29] Kay H Brodersen et al. “Inferring causal impact using Bayesian structural time-series models”. In: The Annals of Applied Statistics 9.1 (2015), pp. 247–274.
[30] Philippe Brouillard et al. “Diﬀerentiable Causal Discovery from Interventional Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01754 (2020).
[31] R.G. Brown. Exponential Smoothing for Predicting Demand. Little, 1956. url: https://books.google. com/books?id=Eo\_rMgEACAAJ.
[32] Christian AW Bruhn et al. “Estimating the populationlevel impact of vaccines using synthetic controls”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.7 (2017), pp. 1524–1529.
[33] Ruichu Cai et al. “Causal discovery from discrete data using hidden compact representation”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 2018 (2018), p. 2666.
[34] Eduardo Cavallo et al. “Catastrophic natural disasters and economic growth”. In: Review of Economics and Statistics 95.5 (2013), pp. 1549–1561.
[35] Mark K Chan, Simon Kwok, et al. “Policy evaluation with interactive ﬁxed eﬀects”. In: Preprint. Available at https://ideas. repec. org/p/syd/wpaper/201611. html (2016).
[36] Lei Chen and Raymond Ng. “On the marriage of lp-norms and edit distance”. In: Proceedings of the Thirtieth international conference on Very large data bases-Volume 30. 2004, pp. 792–803.
[37] Tianjiao Chu, Clark Glymour, and Greg Ridgeway. “Search for Additive Nonlinear Time Series Causal Models.” In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 9.5 (2008).
[38] Matthew A Cole, Robert JR Elliott, and Bowen Liu. “The impact of the Wuhan Covid-19 lockdown on air pollution and health: a machine learning and augmented synthetic control approach”. In: Environmental and Resource Economics (2020), pp. 1–28.
[39] Jane Cooley, Salvador Navarro, and Yuya Takahashi. “Identiﬁcation and estimation of time-varying treatment eﬀects: How the timing of grade retention aﬀects outcomes”. In: manuscrit, University of WisconsinMadison (2010).
[40] Gregory F Cooper and Changwon Yoo. “Causal discovery from a mixture of experimental and observational data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.6686 (2013).
[41] John Cunningham, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Carl Rasmussen. “Gaussian processes for time-marked timeseries data”. In: Artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics. 2012, pp. 255–263.
[42] Andreas Damianou and Neil Lawrence. “Deep gaussian processes”. In: Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics. 2013, pp. 207–215.
[43] Xuan-Hong Dang, Syed Yousaf Shah, and Petros Zerfos. “seq2graph: Discovering Dynamic Dependencies from Multivariate Time Series with Multi-level Attention”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04448 (2018).

[44] Mingzhou Ding, Yonghong Chen, and Steven L Bressler.

[59] Ruocheng Guo et al. “A survey of learning causality

“17 Granger causality: basic theory and application to

with data: Problems and methods”. In: arXiv preprint

neuroscience”. In: Handbook of time series analysis:

arXiv:1809.09337 (2018).

recent theoretical developments and applications 437 (2006).

[60] Nooshin HajiGhassemi and Marc Deisenroth. “Analytic long-term forecasting with periodic Gaussian

[45] Michael Eichler and Vanessa Didelez. “Causal rea-

processes”. In: Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics.

soning in graphical time series models”. In: arXiv

2014, pp. 303–311.

preprint arXiv:1206.5246 (2012).

[61] Stefan Haufe et al. “Sparse causal discovery in mul-

[46] Byron Ellis and Wing Hung Wong. “Learning causal

tivariate time series”. In: Causality: Objectives and

Bayesian network structures from experimental data”.

Assessment. 2010, pp. 97–106.

In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 103.482 (2008), pp. 778–789.

[62] Catherine Hausman and David S Rapson. “Regression discontinuity in time: Considerations for empirical ap-

[47] Doris Entner and Patrik O Hoyer. “On causal discov-

plications”. In: Annual Review of Resource Economics

ery from time series data using FCI”. In: Probabilistic

10 (2018), pp. 533–552.

graphical models (2010), pp. 121–128.

[63] Marton Havasi, Jos´e Miguel Hern´andez-Lobato, and

[48] Hassan Ismail Fawaz et al. “Deep learning for time

Juan Jos´e Murillo-Fuentes. “Inference in deep gaus-

series classiﬁcation: a review”. In: Data Mining and

sian processes using stochastic gradient hamiltonian

Knowledge Discovery 33.4 (2019), pp. 917–963.

monte carlo”. In: Advances in neural information pro-

[49] Tak chung Fu. “A review on time series data mining”.

cessing systems. 2018, pp. 7506–7516.

In: Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

[64] David Heckerman. “A Bayesian approach to learning

24.1 (2011), pp. 164 –181. issn: 0952-1976. doi: https:

causal networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.4958

//doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2010.09.007. url:

(2013).

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0952197610001727.

[65] Donald Hedeker and Robert D Gibbons. Longitudinal data analysis. Vol. 451. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.

[50] Zoubin Ghahramani. “Learning Dynamic Bayesian Networks”. In: In Adaptive Processing of Sequences and Data Structures, Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 1998, pp. 168–197.
[51] Zoubin Ghahramani and Geoﬀrey E. Hinton. Switching State-Space Models. Tech. rep. King’s College Road, Toronto M5S 3H5, 1996.

[66] Miguel A Herna´n and James M Robins. Causal inference. 2010.
[67] Miguel A´ ngel Herna´n, Babette Brumback, and James M Robins. “Marginal structural models to estimate the causal eﬀect of zidovudine on the survival of HIVpositive men”. In: Epidemiology (2000), pp. 561–570.

[52] Zoubin Ghahramani and Michael I. Jordan. “Factorial Hidden Markov Models”. In: Machine Learning. MIT Press, 1996.
[53] Laurent Gobillon and Thierry Magnac. “Regional policy evaluation: Interactive ﬁxed eﬀects and synthetic controls”. In: Review of Economics and Statistics 98.3 (2016), pp. 535–551.
[54] Mingming Gong et al. “Causal discovery from temporally aggregated time series”. In: Uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence: proceedings of the... conference. Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

[68] Craig Hiemstra and Jonathan D Jones. “Testing for linear and nonlinear Granger causality in the stock price-volume relation”. In: The Journal of Finance 49.5 (1994), pp. 1639–1664.
[69] Geoﬀrey E Hinton. “Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence.” In: Neural Computation 14.8 (2002), pp. 1771–1800. url: http: //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12180402.
[70] Patrik Hoyer et al. “Nonlinear causal discovery with additive noise models”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 21 (2008), pp. 689–696.

Vol. 2017. NIH Public Access. 2017.

[71] Biwei Huang et al. “Causal discovery and forecasting

[55] Rodrigo Gonza´lez and Eiji B Hosoda. “Environmental impact of aircraft emissions and aviation fuel tax in Japan”. In: Journal of Air Transport Management 57

in nonstationary environments with state-space models”. In: Proceedings of machine learning research 97 (2019), p. 2901.

(2016), pp. 234–240.

[72] Yuxiao Huang and Samantha Kleinberg. “Fast and

[56] Clive WJ Granger. “Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods”. In: Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society

accurate causal inference from time series data”. In: The Twenty-Eighth International Flairs Conference. 2015.

(1969), pp. 424–438.

[73] Rob Hyndman et al. “A State Space Framework for

[57] Alex Graves. “Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1308.0850 (2013). arXiv: 1308 . 0850. url: http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1308.0850.

Automatic Forecasting Using Exponential Smoothing Methods”. In: International Journal of Forecasting 18 (Feb. 2002), pp. 439–454. doi: 10.1016/S01692070(01)00110-8.

[58] Magda Gregorova, Alexandros Kalousis, and St´ephane

[74] Rob J Hyndman and Anne B Koehler. “Another look

Marchand-Maillet. “Learning Leading Indicators for

at measures of forecast accuracy”. In: International

Time Series Predictions”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.01978

journal of forecasting 22.4 (2006), pp. 679–688.

(2015).

[75] Antti Hyttinen et al. “Causal discovery from subsampled time series data by constraint optimization”. In: (2016).
[76] Aapo Hyva¨rinen, Shohei Shimizu, and Patrik O Hoyer. “Causal modelling combining instantaneous and lagged eﬀects: an identiﬁable model based on non-Gaussianity”. In: Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning. 2008, pp. 424–431.
[77] F´elix Iglesias and Wolfgang Kastner. “Analysis of similarity measures in times series clustering for the discovery of building energy patterns”. In: Energies 6.2 (2013), pp. 579–597.
[78] Amin Jaber et al. “Causal discovery from soft interventions with unknown targets: Characterization and learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020).
[79] Matthew O Jackson, Zhongjian Lin, and Ning Neil Yu. “Adjusting for peer-inﬂuence in propensity scoring when estimating treatment eﬀects”. In: Available at SSRN 3522256 (2020).
[80] Piraporn Jangyodsuk, Dong-Jun Seo, and Jean Gao. “Causal Graph Discovery For Hydrological Time Series Knowledge Discovery”. In: (2014).
[81] Alistair EW Johnson et al. “MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care database”. In: Scientiﬁc data 3.1 (2016), pp. 1–9.
[82] Simon J. Julier and Jeﬀrey K. Uhlmann. “A New Extension of the Kalman Filter to Nonlinear Systems”. In: 1997, pp. 182–193.
[83] Rudolph Emil Kalman and Others. “A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction problems”. In: Journal of basic Engineering 82.1 (1960), pp. 35–45.
[84] Maximilian Karl et al. Deep Variational Bayes Filters: Unsupervised Learning of State Space Models from Raw Data. 2017. arXiv: 1605.06432 [stat.ML].
[85] Jouni Kerman, Peng Wang, and Jon Vaver. “Estimating ad eﬀectiveness using geo experiments in a time-based regression framework”. In: (2017).
[86] Saurabh Khanna and Vincent YF Tan. “Economy Statistical Recurrent Units For Inferring Nonlinear Granger Causality”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09879 (2019).
[87] Samantha Kleinberg. “Causal inference with rare events in large-scale time-series data”. In: TwentyThird International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 2013.
[88] Evangelos Kontopantelis et al. “Regression based quasi-experimental approach when randomisation is not an option: interrupted time series analysis”. In: bmj 350 (2015), h2750.
[89] No´emi Kreif et al. “Examination of the synthetic control method for evaluating health policies with multiple treated units”. In: Health economics 25.12 (2016), pp. 1514–1528.
[90] Michael Lechner et al. The estimation of causal eﬀects by diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence methods. Now, 2011.

[91] [92] [93] [94] [95]
[96] [97] [98] [99]
[100] [101] [102] [103] [104] [105]

Sang Il Lee and Seong Joon Yoo. “Multimodal deep learning for ﬁnance: integrating and forecasting international stock markets”. In: The Journal of Supercomputing (2019), pp. 1–19.
Lei Li and B Aditya Prakash. “Time series clustering: Complex is simpler!” In: ICML. 2011.
Shu Li. “Estimating Causal Eﬀects from Time Series”. PhD thesis. ETH Zurich, 2018.
Shu Li and Peter Bu¨hlmann. “Estimating heterogeneous treatment eﬀects in nonstationary time series with state-space models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04063 (2018).
Steven Cheng-Xian Li and Benjamin M Marlin. “A scalable end-to-end gaussian process adapter for irregularly sampled time series classiﬁcation”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 2016, pp. 1804–1812.
Wei Liao et al. “Evaluating the eﬀective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality”. In: Biological cybernetics 102.1 (2010), pp. 57–69.
Bryan Lim. “Forecasting treatment responses over time using recurrent marginal structural networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2018, pp. 7483–7493.
Jason Lines and Anthony Bagnall. “Ensembles of elastic distance measures for time series classiﬁcation”. In: Proceedings of the 2014 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining. SIAM. 2014, pp. 524–532.
Jason Lines, Sarah Taylor, and Anthony Bagnall. “Hive-cote: The hierarchical vote collective of transformationbased ensembles for time series classiﬁcation”. In: 2016 IEEE 16th international conference on data mining (ICDM). IEEE. 2016, pp. 1041–1046.
Haitao Liu et al. “When Gaussian process meets big data: A review of scalable GPs”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2020).
Ruoqi Liu, Changchang Yin, and Ping Zhang. “Estimating Individual Treatment Eﬀects with TimeVarying Confounders”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.13620 (2020).
Judith J Lok et al. “Statistical modeling of causal effects in continuous time”. In: The Annals of Statistics 36.3 (2008), pp. 1464–1507.
Christos Louizos et al. “Causal eﬀect inference with deep latent-variable models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08821 (2017).
Sindy Lo¨we et al. “Amortized Causal Discovery: Learning to Infer Causal Graphs from Time-Series Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10833 (2020).
Qianli Ma et al. “Learning Representations for Time Series Clustering”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach et al. Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 3781–3791. url: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2019/file/1359aa933b48b754a2f54adb688bfa77-Paper. pdf.

[106] [107]
[108] [109] [110] [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] [116] [117] [118] [119] [120] [121] [122]

Danielle C Maddix, Yuyang Wang, and Alex Smola. “Deep factors with gaussian processes for forecasting”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00098 (2018).

[123]

Stijn Meganck, Philippe Leray, and Bernard Manderick. “Learning causal bayesian networks from observations and experiments: A decision theoretic approach”. In: International Conference on Modeling Decisions for Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Springer. 2006, pp. 58–69.

[124] [125]

Yuan Meng. “Estimating Granger Causality with Unobserved Confounders via Deep Latent-Variable Recurrent Neural Network”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03704
[126] (2019).

Roni Mittelman. “Time-series modeling with undecimated fully convolutional neural networks”. In: (Aug. 2015).
Timo Mitze et al. “Face Masks Considerably Reduce COVID-19 Cases in Germany: A Synthetic Control Method Approach”. In: (2020).
Olof Mogren. “C-RNN-GAN: Continuous recurrent neural networks with adversarial training”. In: CoRR abs/1611.09904 (2016). arXiv: 1611.09904. url: http: //arxiv.org/abs/1611.09904.

[127] [128] [129]

Erica EM Moodie, Thomas S Richardson, and David A Stephens. “Demystifying optimal dynamic treatment regimes”. In: Biometrics 63.2 (2007), pp. 447–455.
Joris M Mooij et al. “Distinguishing cause from eﬀect using observational data: methods and benchmarks”. In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research 17.1 (2016), pp. 1103–1204.

[130]

Susan A Murphy. “Optimal dynamic treatment regimes”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 65.2 (2003), pp. 331–355.

[131]

A¨aron van den Oord et al. “WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio”. In: Arxiv. 2016. url: https: //arxiv.org/abs/1609.03499.

[132]

Zheyi Pan et al. “Hyperst-net: Hypernetworks for

spatio-temporal forecasting”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10889

(2018).

[133]

Angeliki Papana et al. “Simulation study of direct causality measures in multivariate time series”. In: Entropy 15.7 (2013), pp. 2635–2661.
Robert B Penfold and Fang Zhang. “Use of interrupted time series analysis in evaluating health care quality improvements”. In: Academic pediatrics 13.6 (2013), S38–S44.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Scho¨lkopf. “Causal inference on time series using restricted structural equation models”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2013, pp. 154–162.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Scho¨lkopf. Elements of causal inference. The MIT Press, 2017.

[134] [135] [136]

Niklas Pﬁster, Peter Bu¨hlmann, and Jonas Peters. “Invariant causal prediction for sequential data”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 114.527 (2019), pp. 1264–1276.

[137]

Joaquin Quin˜onero-Candela and Carl Edward Rasmussen. “A unifying view of sparse approximate Gaussian process regression”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 6.Dec (2005), pp. 1939–1959.

[138]

Carl Edward Rasmussen. “Gaussian processes in machine learning”. In: Summer School on Machine Learning. Springer. 2003, pp. 63–71.
Peter Sykacek Stephen Roberts. “Bayesian time series classiﬁcation”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 14 (2002), p. 937.
Stephen Roberts et al. “Gaussian processes for timeseries modelling”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 371.1984 (2013), p. 20110550.
James Robins. “Estimation of the time-dependent accelerated failure time model in the presence of confounding factors”. In: Biometrika 79.2 (1992), pp. 321– 334.
James Robins and Miguel Hernan. “Estimation of the causal eﬀects of time-varying exposure”. In: Aug. 2008, pp. 553–599. doi: 10.1201/9781420011579.ch23.
James M Robins. “Causal inference from complex longitudinal data”. In: Latent variable modeling and applications to causality. Springer, 1997, pp. 69–117.
James M Robins. “Optimal structural nested models for optimal sequential decisions”. In: Proceedings of the second seattle Symposium in Biostatistics. Springer. 2004, pp. 189–326.
James M Robins, Sander Greenland, and Fu-Chang Hu. “Estimation of the causal eﬀect of a time-varying exposure on the marginal mean of a repeated binary outcome”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 94.447 (1999), pp. 687–700.
James M Robins, Miguel Angel Hernan, and Babette Brumback. Marginal structural models and causal inference in epidemiology. 2000.
Paul R Rosenbaum and Donald B Rubin. “The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal eﬀects”. In: Biometrika 70.1 (1983), pp. 41– 55.
Dominik Rothenha¨usler et al. “BACKSHIFT: Learning causal cyclic graphs from unknown shift interventions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2015, pp. 1513–1521.
J Runge, D Sejdinovic, and S Flaxman. “Detecting causal associations in large nonlinear time series datasets. arXiv 2017”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.07007 ().
Jakob Runge. “Causal network reconstruction from time series: From theoretical assumptions to practical estimation”. In: Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 28.7 (2018), p. 075310.
Jakob Runge. “Discovering contemporaneous and lagged causal relations in autocorrelated nonlinear time series datasets”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03685 (2020).
Jakob Runge et al. “Inferring causation from time series in Earth system sciences”. In: Nature communications 10.1 (2019), pp. 1–13.
Yunus Saatc¸i. “Scalable inference for structured Gaussian process models”. PhD thesis. Citeseer, 2012.

[139] [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] [145] [146] [147] [148]
[149]
[150] [151] [152] [153] [154]

Pantelis Samartsidis et al. “A Bayesian multivariate factor analysis model for evaluating an intervention by using observational time series data on multiple outcomes”. In: (2020).
Pantelis Samartsidis et al. “Assessing the causal eﬀect of binary interventions from observational panel data with few treated units”. In: Statistical Science 34.3 (2019), pp. 486–503.
Lawrence K. Saul and Michael I. Jordan. Mixed memory Markov models: decomposing complex stochastic processes as mixtures of simpler ones. 1998.
Jessica Saunders et al. “A synthetic control approach to evaluating place-based crime interventions”. In: Journal of Quantitative Criminology 31.3 (2015), pp. 413– 434.
Ulrich Schaechtle, Kostas Stathis, and Stefano Bromuri. “Multi-dimensional causal discovery”. In: TwentyThird International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 2013.
Thomas Schreiber. “Measuring information transfer”. In: Physical review letters 85.2 (2000), p. 461.
Matt Shannon and William Byrne. “A formulation of the autoregressive HMM for speech synthesis”. In: (Apr. 2011).
Shohei Shimizu et al. “A linear non-Gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery.” In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 7.10 (2006).
Ali Shojaie and George Michailidis. “Discovering graphical Granger causality using the truncating lasso penalty”. In: Bioinformatics 26.18 (2010), pp. i517–i523.
Elsa Siggiridou and Dimitris Kugiumtzis. “Granger causality in multivariate time series using a timeordered restricted vector autoregressive model”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 64.7 (2015), pp. 1759–1773.
Hossein Soleimani, Adarsh Subbaswamy, and Suchi Saria. “Treatment-response models for counterfactual reasoning with continuous-time, continuous-valued interventions”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.02038 (2017).
P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. 2nd. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour. “An algorithm for fast recovery of sparse causal graphs”. In: Social science computer review 9.1 (1991), pp. 62–72.
Peter Spirtes and Kun Zhang. “Causal discovery and inference: concepts and recent methodological advances”. In: Applied informatics. Vol. 3. 1. Springer. 2016, p. 3.
Mark Steyvers et al. “Inferring causal networks from observations and interventions”. In: Cognitive science 27.3 (2003), pp. 453–489.
Adolf Stips et al. “On the causal structure between CO 2 and global temperature”. In: Scientiﬁc reports 6.1 (2016), pp. 1–9.

[155] [156] [157]
[158] [159] [160] [161]
[162]
[163]
[164] [165] [166] [167] [168] [169]

Jie Sun and Erik M Bollt. “Causation entropy identiﬁes indirect inﬂuences, dominance of neighbors and anticipatory couplings”. In: Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 267 (2014), pp. 49–57.
Jie Sun, Dane Taylor, and Erik M Bollt. “Causal network inference by optimal causation entropy”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 14.1 (2015), pp. 73–106.
Ilya Sutskever and Geoﬀrey E. Hinton. “Learning Multilevel Distributed Representations for High-Dimensional Sequences.” In: AISTATS. Ed. by Marina Meila and Xiaotong Shen. Vol. 2. JMLR Proceedings. JMLR.org, 2007, pp. 548–555. url: http://dblp.uni- trier. de/db/journals/jmlr/jmlrp2.html#SutskeverH07.
Alex Tank et al. “Neural granger causality for nonlinear time series”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05842 (2018).
Graham W. Taylor. “Composable, distributed-state models for high-dimensional time series”. In: 2009.
Timo Tera¨svirta, Dag Tjøstheim, Clive William John Granger, et al. Modelling nonlinear economic time series. Oxford University Press Oxford, 2010.
Felipe Tobar, Thang D Bui, and Richard E Turner. “Learning stationary time series using Gaussian processes with nonparametric kernels”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2015, pp. 3501– 3509.
Frank de Vocht. “Inferring the 1985–2014 impact of mobile phone use on selected brain cancer subtypes using Bayesian structural time series and synthetic controls”. In: Environment international 97 (2016), pp. 100–107.
Frank de Vocht et al. “The intervention eﬀect of local alcohol licensing policies on hospital admission and crime: a natural experiment using a novel Bayesian synthetictime-series method”. In: J Epidemiol Community Health 71.9 (2017), pp. 912–918.
Jack M. Wang, David J. Fleet, and Aaron Hertzmann. “Gaussian process dynamical models”. In: In NIPS. MIT Press, 2006, pp. 1441–1448.
Yuyang Wang et al. “Deep factors for forecasting”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2019, pp. 6607–6617.
Andrew Wilson and Ryan Adams. “Gaussian process kernels for pattern discovery and extrapolation”. In: International conference on machine learning. 2013, pp. 1067–1075.
Andrew Wilson and Hannes Nickisch. “Kernel interpolation for scalable structured Gaussian processes (KISS-GP)”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. 2015, pp. 1775–1784.
Andrew G Wilson et al. “Stochastic variational deep kernel learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29 (2016), pp. 2586–2594.
Andrew Gordon Wilson et al. “Deep kernel learning”. In: Artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics. 2016, pp. 370– 378.

[170] [171] [172] [173] [174]
[175] [176] [177]
[178] [179] [180]

Coady Wing, Kosali Simon, and Ricardo A BelloGomez. “Designing diﬀerence in diﬀerence studies: best practices for public health policy research”. In: Annual review of public health 39 (2018).
Geoﬀrey T Wodtke. “Regression-based adjustment for time-varying confounders”. In: Sociological Methods & Research 49.4 (2020), pp. 906–946.
Tailin Wu et al. “Nonlinear Causal Discovery with Minimum Predictive Information Regularization”. In: ().
Zhengzheng Xing, Jian Pei, and Eamonn Keogh. “A brief survey on sequence classiﬁcation”. In: ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter 12.1 (2010), pp. 40– 48.
Chenxiao Xu, Hao Huang, and Shinjae Yoo. “Scalable Causal Graph Learning through a Deep Neural Network”. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 2019, pp. 1853–1862.
Yanbo Xu, Yanxun Xu, and Suchi Saria. “A Bayesian nonparametric approach for estimating individualized treatment-response curves”. In: Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference. 2016, pp. 282–300.
Yiqing Xu. “Generalized synthetic control method: Causal inference with interactive ﬁxed eﬀects models”. In: Political Analysis 25.1 (2017), pp. 57–76.
Jinsung Yoon, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela van der Schaar. “Google Chrome Privacy Whitepaper”. In: Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. url: http://papers. nips . cc / paper / 8789 - time - series - generative adversarial-networks.pdf.
Kun Zhang and Lai-Wan Chan. “Extensions of ICA for causality discovery in the hong kong stock market”. In: International Conference on Neural Information Processing. Springer. 2006, pp. 400–409.
Xun Zheng et al. State Space LSTM Models with Particle MCMC Inference. 2017. arXiv: 1711.11179 [cs.LG].
Liangyu Zhu, Wenbin Lu, and Rui Song. “Causal Eﬀect Estimation and Optimal Dose Suggestions in Mobile Health”. In: ICML (2020).

