Categorical Data Analysis

Categorical Data Analysis
Second Edition
ALAN AGRESTI University of Florida Gainesville, Florida

This book is printed on acid-free paper. "Пұ
Copyright б®Ҡ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. All rights reserved. Published simultaneously in Canada. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, ЕҪ978. 750-8400, fax ЕҪ978. 750-4744. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158-0012, ЕҪ212. 850-6011, fax ЕҪ212. 850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM. For ordering and customer service, call 1-800-CALL-WILEY.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Is AВ©ailable
ISBN 0-471-36093-7
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Jacki

Contents

Preface

xiii

1. Introduction: Distributions and Inference for Categorical Data

1

1.1 Categorical Response Data, 1 1.2 Distributions for Categorical Data, 5 1.3 Statistical Inference for Categorical Data, 9 1.4 Statistical Inference for Binomial Parameters, 14 1.5 Statistical Inference for Multinomial Parameters, 21 Notes, 26 Problems, 28

2. Describing Contingency Tables

36

2.1 Probability Structure for Contingency Tables, 36 2.2 Comparing Two Proportions, 43 2.3 Partial Association in Stratified 2 = 2 Tables, 47 2.4 Extensions for I = J Tables, 54 Notes, 59 Problems, 60

3. Inference for Contingency Tables

70

3.1 Confidence Intervals for Association Parameters, 70 3.2 Testing Independence in Two-Way Contingency
Tables, 78 3.3 Following-Up Chi-Squared Tests, 80 3.4 Two-Way Tables with Ordered Classifications, 86 3.5 Small-Sample Tests of Independence, 91

vii

viii

CONTENTS

3.6 Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for 2 = 2 Tables,* 98 3.7 Extensions for Multiway Tables and Nontabulated
Responses, 101 Notes, 102 Problems, 104

4. Introduction to Generalized Linear Models

115

4.1 Generalized Linear Model, 116 4.2 Generalized Linear Models for Binary Data, 120 4.3 Generalized Linear Models for Counts, 125 4.4 Moments and Likelihood for Generalized Linear
Models,* 132 4.5 Inference for Generalized Linear Models, 139 4.6 Fitting Generalized Linear Models, 143 4.7 Quasi-likelihood and Generalized Linear Models,* 149 4.8 Generalized Additive Models,* 153 Notes, 155 Problems, 156

5. Logistic Regression

165

5.1 Interpreting Parameters in Logistic Regression, 166 5.2 Inference for Logistic Regression, 172 5.3 Logit Models with Categorical Predictors, 177 5.4 Multiple Logistic Regression, 182 5.5 Fitting Logistic Regression Models, 192 Notes, 196 Problems, 197

6. Building and Applying Logistic Regression Models

211

6.1 Strategies in Model Selection, 211 6.2 Logistic Regression Diagnostics, 219 6.3 Inference About Conditional Associations in 2 = 2 = K
Tables, 230 6.4 Using Models to Improve Inferential Power, 236 6.5 Sample Size and Power Considerations,* 240 6.6 Probit and Complementary Log-Log Models,* 245

*Sections marked with an asterisk are less important for an overview.

CONTENTS

ix

6.7 Conditional Logistic Regression and Exact Distributions,* 250
Notes, 257 Problems, 259

7. Logit Models for Multinomial Responses

267

7.1 Nominal Responses: Baseline-Category Logit Models, 267 7.2 Ordinal Responses: Cumulative Logit Models, 274 7.3 Ordinal Responses: Cumulative Link Models, 282 7.4 Alternative Models for Ordinal Responses,* 286 7.5 Testing Conditional Independence in I = J = K
Tables,* 293 7.6 Discrete-Choice Multinomial Logit Models,* 298 Notes, 302 Problems, 302

8. Loglinear Models for Contingency Tables

314

8.1 Loglinear Models for Two-Way Tables, 314 8.2 Loglinear Models for Independence and Interaction in
Three-Way Tables, 318 8.3 Inference for Loglinear Models, 324 8.4 Loglinear Models for Higher Dimensions, 326 8.5 The LoglinearбҺҗLogit Model Connection, 330 8.6 Loglinear Model Fitting: Likelihood Equations and
Asymptotic Distributions,* 333 8.7 Loglinear Model Fitting: Iterative Methods and their
Application,* 342 Notes, 346 Problems, 347

9. Building and Extending LoglinearrLogit Models

357

9.1 Association Graphs and Collapsibility, 357 9.2 Model Selection and Comparison, 360 9.3 Diagnostics for Checking Models, 366 9.4 Modeling Ordinal Associations, 367 9.5 Association Models,* 373 9.6 Association Models, Correlation Models, and
Correspondence Analysis,* 379

x

CONTENTS

9.7 Poisson Regression for Rates, 385 9.8 Empty Cells and Sparseness in Modeling Contingency
Tables, 391 Notes, 398 Problems, 400

10. Models for Matched Pairs

409

10.1 Comparing Dependent Proportions, 410 10.2 Conditional Logistic Regression for Binary Matched
Pairs, 414 10.3 Marginal Models for Square Contingency Tables, 420 10.4 Symmetry, Quasi-symmetry, and Quasi-
independence, 423 10.5 Measuring Agreement Between Observers, 431 10.6 BradleyбҺҗTerry Model for Paired Preferences, 436 10.7 Marginal Models and Quasi-symmetry Models for
Matched Sets,* 439 Notes, 442 Problems, 444

11. Analyzing Repeated Categorical Response Data

455

11.1 Comparing Marginal Distributions: Multiple Responses, 456
11.2 Marginal Modeling: Maximum Likelihood Approach, 459 11.3 Marginal Modeling: Generalized Estimating Equations
Approach, 466 11.4 Quasi-likelihood and Its GEE Multivariate Extension:
Details,* 470 11.5 Markov Chains: Transitional Modeling, 476 Notes, 481 Problems, 482

12. Random Effects: Generalized Linear Mixed Models for

Categorical Responses

491

12.1 Random Effects Modeling of Clustered Categorical Data, 492
12.2 Binary Responses: Logistic-Normal Model, 496 12.3 Examples of Random Effects Models for Binary
Data, 502 12.4 Random Effects Models for Multinomial Data, 513

CONTENTS

xi

12.5 Multivariate Random Effects Models for Binary Data, 516
12.6 GLMM Fitting, Inference, and Prediction, 520 Notes, 526 Problems, 527

13. Other Mixture Models for Categorical Data*

538

13.1 Latent Class Models, 538 13.2 Nonparametric Random Effects Models, 545 13.3 Beta-Binomial Models, 553 13.4 Negative Binomial Regression, 559 13.5 Poisson Regression with Random Effects, 563 Notes, 565 Problems, 566

14. Asymptotic Theory for Parametric Models

576

14.1 Delta Method, 577 14.2 Asymptotic Distributions of Estimators of Model
Parameters and Cell Probabilities, 582 14.3 Asymptotic Distributions of Residuals and Goodness-
of-Fit Statistics, 587 14.4 Asymptotic Distributions for LogitrLoglinear
Models, 592 Notes, 594 Problems, 595

15. Alternative Estimation Theory for Parametric Models

600

15.1 Weighted Least Squares for Categorical Data, 600 15.2 Bayesian Inference for Categorical Data, 604 15.3 Other Methods of Estimation, 611 Notes, 615 Problems, 616

16. Historical Tour of Categorical Data Analysis*

619

16.1 PearsonбҺҗYule Association Controversy, 619 16.2 R. A. FisherвҖҷs Contributions, 622

xii

CONTENTS

16.3 Logistic Regression, 624
16.4 Multiway Contingency Tables and Loglinear Models, 625 16.5 Recent ЕҪand Future?. Developments, 629

Appendix A. Using Computer Software to Analyze Categorical Data 632
A.1 Software for Categorical Data Analysis, 632 A.2 Examples of SAS Code by Chapter, 634

Appendix B. Chi-Squared Distribution Values

654

References

655

Examples Index

689

Author Index

693

Subject Index

701

Preface
The explosion in the development of methods for analyzing categorical data that began in the 1960s has continued apace in recent years. This book provides an overview of these methods, as well as older, now standard, methods. It gives special emphasis to generalized linear modeling techniques, which extend linear model methods for continuous variables, and their extensions for multivariate responses.
Today, because of this development and the ubiquity of categorical data in applications, most statistics and biostatistics departments offer courses on categorical data analysis. This book can be used as a text for such courses. The material in Chapters 1бҺҗ7 forms the heart of most courses. Chapters 1бҺҗ3 cover distributions for categorical responses and traditional methods for two-way contingency tables. Chapters 4бҺҗ7 introduce logistic regression and related logit models for binary and multicategory response variables. Chapters 8 and 9 cover loglinear models for contingency tables. Over time, this model class seems to have lost importance, and this edition reduces somewhat its discussion of them and expands its focus on logistic regression.
In the past decade, the major area of new research has been the development of methods for repeated measurement and other forms of clustered categorical data. Chapters 10бҺҗ13 present these methods, including marginal models and generalized linear mixed models with random effects. Chapters 14 and 15 present theoretical foundations as well as alternatives to the maximum likelihood paradigm that this text adopts. Chapter 16 is devoted to a historical overview of the development of the methods. It examines contributions of noted statisticians, such as Pearson and Fisher, whose pioneering effortsбҺҸand sometimes vocal debatesбҺҸbroke the ground for this evolution.
Every chapter of the first edition has been extensively rewritten, and some substantial additions and changes have occurred. The major differences are:
в…· A new Chapter 1 that introduces distributions and methods of inference for categorical data.
в…· A unified presentation of models as special cases of generalized linear models, starting in Chapter 4 and then throughout the text.
xiii

xiv

PREFACE

в…· Greater emphasis on logistic regression for binary response variables and extensions for multicategory responses, with Chapters 4бҺҗ7 introducing models and Chapters 10бҺҗ13 extending them for clustered data.
в…· Three new chapters on methods for clustered, correlated categorical data, increasingly important in applications.
в…· A new chapter on the historical development of the methods.
в…· More discussion of вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ small-sample procedures and of conditional logistic regression.

In this text, I interpret categorical data analysis to refer to methods for categorical response variables. For most methods, explanatory variables can be qualitative or quantitative, as in ordinary regression. Thus, the focus is intended to be more general than contingency table analysis, although for simplicity of data presentation, most examples use contingency tables. These examples are often simplistic, but should help readers focus on understanding the methods themselves and make it easier for them to replicate results with their favorite software.
Special features of the text include:

в…· More than 100 analyses of вҖҳвҖҳrealвҖҷвҖҷ data sets.
в…· More than 600 exercises at the end of the chapters, some directed towards theory and methods and some towards applications and data analysis.
в…· An appendix that shows, by chapter, the use of SAS for performing analyses presented in this book.
в…· Notes at the end of each chapter that provide references for recent research and many topics not covered in the text.

Appendix A summarizes statistical software needed to use the methods described in this text. It shows how to use SAS for analyses included in the text and refers to a web site ЕҪwww.stat.ufl.edur; aarcdarcda.html. that contains ЕҪ1. information on the use of other software ЕҪsuch as R, S-plus, SPSS, and Stata., ЕҪ2. data sets for examples in the form of complete SAS programs for conducting the analyses, ЕҪ3. short answers for many of the odd-numbered exercises, ЕҪ4. corrections of errors in early printings of the book, and ЕҪ5. extra exercises. I recommend that readers refer to this appendix or specialized manuals while reading the text, as an aid to implementing the methods.
I intend this book to be accessible to the diverse mix of students who take graduate-level courses in categorical data analysis. But I have also written it with practicing statisticians and biostatisticians in mind. I hope it enables them to catch up with recent advances and learn about methods that sometimes receive inadequate attention in the traditional statistics curriculum.

PREFACE

xv

The development of new methods has influenced бҺҸand been influenced byбҺҸthe increasing availability of data sets with categorical responses in the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences, as well as in public health, human genetics, ecology, education, marketing, and industrial quality control. And so, although this book is directed mainly to statisticians and biostatisticians, I also aim for it to be helpful to methodologists in these fields.
Readers should possess a background that includes regression and analysis of variance models, as well as maximum likelihood methods of statistical theory. Those not having much theory background should be able to follow most methodological discussions. Sections and subsections marked with an asterisk are less important for an overview. Readers with mainly applied interests can skip most of Chapter 4 on the theory of generalized linear models and proceed to other chapters. However, the book has distinctly higher technical level and is more thorough and complete than my lower-level text, An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis ЕҪWiley, 1996..
I thank those who commented on parts of the manuscript or provided help of some type. Special thanks to Bernhard Klingenberg, who read several chapters carefully and made many helpful suggestions, Yongyi Min, who constructed many of the figures and helped with some software, and Brian Caffo, who helped with some examples. Many thanks to Rosyln Stone and Brian Marx for each reviewing half the manuscript and Brian Caffo, I-Ming Liu, and Yongyi Min for giving insightful comments on several chapters. Thanks to Constantine Gatsonis and his students for using a draft in a course at Brown University and providing suggestions. Others who provided comments on chapters or help of some type include Patricia Altham, Wicher Bergsma, Jane Brockmann, Brent Coull, Al DeMaris, Regina Dittrich, Jianping Dong, Herwig Friedl, Ralitza Gueorguieva, James Hobert, Walter Katzenbeisser, Harry Khamis, Svend Kreiner, Joseph Lang, Jason Liao, Mojtaba Ganjali, Jane Pendergast, Michael Radelet, Kenneth Small, Maura Stokes, Tom Ten Have, and Rongling Wu. I thank my co-authors on various projects, especially Brent Coull, Joseph Lang, James Booth, James Hobert, Brian Caffo, and Ranjini Natarajan, for permission to use material from those articles. Thanks to the many who reviewed material or suggested examples for the first edition, mentioned in the Preface of that edition. Thanks also to Wiley Executive Editor Steve Quigley for his steadfast encouragement and facilitation of this project. Finally, thanks to my wife Jacki Levine for continuing support of all kinds, despite the many days this work has taken from our time together.

ALAN AGRESTI

GainesВ®ille, Florida NoВ®ember 2001

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 1
Introduction: Distributions and Inference for Categorical Data
From helping to assess the value of new medical treatments to evaluating the factors that affect our opinions and behaviors, analysts today are finding myriad uses for categorical data methods. In this book we introduce these methods and the theory behind them.
Statistical methods for categorical responses were late in gaining the level of sophistication achieved early in the twentieth century by methods for continuous responses. Despite influential work around 1900 by the British statistician Karl Pearson, relatively little development of models for categorical responses occurred until the 1960s. In this book we describe the early fundamental work that still has importance today but place primary emphasis on more recent modeling approaches. Before outlining the topics covered, we describe the major types of categorical data.
1.1 CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA
A categorical В®ariable has a measurement scale consisting of a set of categories. For instance, political philosophy is often measured as liberal, moderate, or conservative. Diagnoses regarding breast cancer based on a mammogram use the categories normal, benign, probably benign, suspicious, and malignant.
The development of methods for categorical variables was stimulated by research studies in the social and biomedical sciences. Categorical scales are pervasive in the social sciences for measuring attitudes and opinions. Categorical scales in biomedical sciences measure outcomes such as whether a medical treatment is successful.
Although categorical data are common in the social and biomedical sciences, they are by no means restricted to those areas. They frequently
1

2

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

occur in the behavioral sciences ЕҪe.g., type of mental illness, with the categories schizophrenia, depression, neurosis., epidemiology and public health ЕҪe.g., contraceptive method at last intercourse, with the categories none, condom, pill, IUD, other., genetics ЕҪtype of allele inherited by an offspring., zoology ЕҪe.g., alligatorsвҖҷ primary food preference, with the categories fish, invertebrate, reptile., education ЕҪe.g., student responses to an exam question, with the categories correct and incorrect., and marketing ЕҪe.g., consumer preference among leading brands of a product, with the categories brand A, brand B, and brand C.. They even occur in highly quantitative fields such as engineering sciences and industrial quality control. Examples are the classification of items according to whether they conform to certain standards, and subjective evaluation of some characteristic: how soft to the touch a certain fabric is, how good a particular food product tastes, or how easy to perform a worker finds a certain task to be.
Categorical variables are of many types. In this section we provide ways of classifying them and other variables.

1.1.1 ResponseвҖ“Explanatory Variable Distinction
Most statistical analyses distinguish between response ЕҪor dependent. В®ariables and explanatory ЕҪor independent. В®ariables. For instance, regression models describe how the mean of a response variable, such as the selling price of a house, changes according to the values of explanatory variables, such as square footage and location. In this book we focus on methods for categorical response variables. As in ordinary regression, explanatory variables can be of any type.

1.1.2 NominalвҖ“Ordinal Scale Distinction
Categorical variables have two primary types of scales. Variables having categories without a natural ordering are called nominal. Examples are religious affiliation ЕҪwith the categories Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Muslim, other., mode of transportation to work ЕҪautomobile, bicycle, bus, subway, walk., favorite type of music ЕҪclassical, country, folk, jazz, rock., and choice of residence ЕҪapartment, condominium, house, other.. For nominal variables, the order of listing the categories is irrelevant. The statistical analysis does not depend on that ordering.
Many categorical variables do have ordered categories. Such variables are called ordinal. Examples are size of automobile ЕҪsubcompact, compact, midsize, large., social class ЕҪupper, middle, lower., political philosophy ЕҪliberal, moderate, conservative., and patient condition ЕҪgood, fair, serious, critical.. Ordinal variables have ordered categories, but distances between categories are unknown. Although a person categorized as moderate is more liberal than a person categorized as conservative, no numerical value describes how much more liberal that person is. Methods for ordinal variables utilize the category ordering.

CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

3

An interВ®al В®ariable is one that does have numerical distances between any two values. For example, blood pressure level, functional life length of television set, length of prison term, and annual income are interval variables. ЕҪAn internal variable is sometimes called a ratio В®ariable if ratios of values are also valid..
The way that a variable is measured determines its classification. For example, вҖҳвҖҳeducationвҖҷвҖҷ is only nominal when measured as public school or private school; it is ordinal when measured by highest degree attained, using the categories none, high school, bachelorвҖҷs, masterвҖҷs, and doctorate; it is interval when measured by number of years of education, using the integers 0, 1, 2, . . . .
A variableвҖҷs measurement scale determines which statistical methods are appropriate. In the measurement hierarchy, interval variables are highest, ordinal variables are next, and nominal variables are lowest. Statistical methods for variables of one type can also be used with variables at higher levels but not at lower levels. For instance, statistical methods for nominal variables can be used with ordinal variables by ignoring the ordering of categories. Methods for ordinal variables cannot, however, be used with nominal variables, since their categories have no meaningful ordering. It is usually best to apply methods appropriate for the actual scale.
Since this book deals with categorical responses, we discuss the analysis of nominal and ordinal variables. The methods also apply to interval variables having a small number of distinct values ЕҪe.g., number of times married. or for which the values are grouped into ordered categories ЕҪe.g., education measured as - 10 years, 10бҺҗ12 years, ) 12 years..

1.1.3 ContinuousвҖ“Discrete Variable Distinction
Variables are classified as continuous or discrete, according to the number of values they can take. Actual measurement of all variables occurs in a discrete manner, due to precision limitations in measuring instruments. The continuousбҺҗdiscrete classification, in practice, distinguishes between variables that take lots of values and variables that take few values. For instance, statisticians often treat discrete interval variables having a large number of values ЕҪsuch as test scores. as continuous, using them in methods for continuous responses.
This book deals with certain types of discretely measured responses: ЕҪ1. nominal variables, ЕҪ2. ordinal variables, ЕҪ3. discrete interval variables having relatively few values, and ЕҪ4. continuous variables grouped into a small number of categories.

1.1.4 QuantitativeвҖ“Qualitative Variable Distinction
Nominal variables are qualitatiВ®eбҺҸdistinct categories differ in quality, not in quantity. Interval variables are quantitatiВ®eбҺҸdistinct levels have differing amounts of the characteristic of interest. The position of ordinal variables in

4

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

the quantitativeбҺҗqualitative classification is fuzzy. Analysts often treat them as qualitative, using methods for nominal variables. But in many respects, ordinal variables more closely resemble interval variables than they resemble nominal variables. They possess important quantitative features: Each category has a greater or smaller magnitude of the characteristic than another category; and although not possible to measure, an underlying continuous variable is usually present. The political philosophy classification ЕҪliberal, moderate, conservative. crudely measures an inherently continuous characteristic.
Analysts often utilize the quantitative nature of ordinal variables by assigning numerical scores to categories or assuming an underlying continuous distribution. This requires good judgment and guidance from researchers who use the scale, but it provides benefits in the variety of methods available for data analysis.

1.1.5 Organization of This Book
The models for categorical response variables discussed in this book resemble regression models for continuous response variables; however, they assume binomial, multinomial, or Poisson response distributions instead of normality. Two types of models receive special attention, logistic regression and loglinear models. Ordinary logistic regression models, also called logit models, apply with binary ЕҪi.e., two-category. responses and assume a binomial distribution. Generalizations of logistic regression apply with multicategory responses and assume a multinomial distribution. Loglinear models apply with count data and assume a Poisson distribution. Certain equivalences exist between logistic regression and loglinear models.
The book has four main units. In the first, Chapters 1 through 3, we summarize descriptive and inferential methods for univariate and bivariate categorical data. These chapters cover discrete distributions, methods of inference, and analyses for measures of association. They summarize the non-model-based methods developed prior to about 1960.
In the second and primary unit, Chapters 4 through 9, we introduce models for categorical responses. In Chapter 4 we describe a class of generalized linear models having models of this text as special cases. We focus on models for binary and count response variables. Chapters 5 and 6 cover the most important model for binary responses, logistic regression. In Chapter 7 we present generalizations of that model for nominal and ordinal multicategory response variables. In Chapter 8 we introduce the modeling of multivariate categorical response data and show how to represent association and interaction patterns by loglinear models for counts in the table that cross-classifies those responses. In Chapter 9 we discuss model building with loglinear and related logistic models and present some related models.
In the third unit, Chapters 10 through 13, we discuss models for handling repeated measurement and other forms of clustering. In Chapter 10 we

DISTRIBUTIONS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

5

present models for a categorical response with matched pairs; these apply, for instance, with a categorical response measured for the same subjects at two times. Chapter 11 covers models for more general types of repeated categorical data, such as longitudinal data from several times with explanatory variables. In Chapter 12 we present a broad class of models, generalized linear mixed models, that use random effects to account for dependence with such data. In Chapter 13 further extensions and applications of the models from Chapters 10 through 12 are described.
The fourth and final unit is more theoretical. In Chapter 14 we develop asymptotic theory for categorical data models. This theory is the basis for large-sample behavior of model parameter estimators and goodness-of-fit statistics. Maximum likelihood estimation receives primary attention here and throughout the book, but Chapter 15 covers alternative methods of estimation, such as the Bayesian paradigm. Chapter 16 stands alone from the others, being a historical overview of the development of categorical data methods.
Most categorical data methods require extensive computations, and statistical software is necessary for their effective use. In Appendix A we discuss software that can perform the analyses in this book and show the use of SAS for text examples. See the Web site www. stat.ufl.edur; aarcdarcda.html to download sample programs and data sets and find information about other software.
Chapter 1 provides background material. In Section 1.2 we review the key distributions for categorical data: the binomial, multinomial, and Poisson. In Section 1.3 we review the primary mechanisms for statistical inference, using maximum likelihood. In Sections 1.4 and 1.5 we illustrate these by presenting significance tests and confidence intervals for binomial and multinomial parameters.

1.2 DISTRIBUTIONS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA
Inferential data analyses require assumptions about the random mechanism that generated the data. For regression models with continuous responses, the normal distribution plays the central role. In this section we review the three key distributions for categorical responses: binomial, multinomial, and Poisson.
1.2.1 Binomial Distribution
Many applications refer to a fixed number n of binary observations. Let y1, y2 , . . . , yn denote responses for n independent and identical trials such that PЕҪYi s 1. s вҗІ and PЕҪYi s 0. s 1 y вҗІ . We use the generic labels вҖҳвҖҳsuccessвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳfailureвҖҷвҖҷ for outcomes 1 and 0. Identical trials means that the probability of success вҗІ is the same for each trial. Independent trials means

6

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

that the Г„Yi4 are independent random variables. These are often called Bernoulli trials. The total number of successes, Y s Гқis1 n Yi, has the binomial distribution with index n and parameter вҗІ , denoted by binЕҪ n,вҗІ ..
The probability mass function for the possible outcomes y for Y is

Еҫ / pЕҪ y. s ny вҗІ y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . nyy , y s 0, 1, 2, . . . , n,

ЕҪ 1 .1.

Еҫ / where the binomial coefficient

n y

s n!rw y! ЕҪ n y y.!x. Since EЕҪYi. s EЕҪYi2 .

s 1 = вҗІ q 0 = ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . s вҗІ ,

EЕҪ Yi . s вҗІ and varЕҪ Yi . s вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . .

The binomial distribution for Y s ГқiYi has mean and variance

вҗ® s EЕҪ Y . s nвҗІ and вҗҙ 2 s varЕҪ Y . s nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . .
The skewness is described by EЕҪY y вҗ®.3rвҗҙ 3 s ЕҪ1 y 2вҗІ .r'nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . .
The distribution converges to normality as n increases, for fixed вҗІ . There is no guarantee that successive binary observations are independent
or identical. Thus, occasionally, we will utilize other distributions. One such case is sampling binary outcomes without replacement from a finite population, such as observations on gender for 10 students sampled from a class of size 20. The hypergeometric distribution, studied in Section 3.5.1, is then relevant. In Section 1.2.4 we mention another case that violates these binomial assumptions.

1.2.2 Multinomial Distribution

Some trials have more than two possible outcomes. Suppose that each of n independent, identical trials can have outcome in any of c categories. Let yi j s 1 if trial i has outcome in category j and yi j s 0 otherwise. Then yi s ЕҪ yi1, yi2 , . . . , yic. represents a multinomial trial, with Гқj yi j s 1; for instance, ЕҪ0, 0, 1, 0. denotes outcome in category 3 of four possible categories. Note that yic is redundant, being linearly dependent on the others. Let nj s Гқi yi j denote the number of trials having outcome in category j. The counts ЕҪ n1, n2 , . . . , nc. have the multinomial distribution.
Let вҗІj s PЕҪYi j s 1. denote the probability of outcome in category j for each trial. The multinomial probability mass function is

Еҫ / pЕҪ n1, n2 , . . . , ncy1 . s

n! n1! n2 ! РёРёРё nc!

вҗІ n1 1вҗІ n2 2 РёРёРё вҗІ nc c .

ЕҪ 1 .2.

DISTRIBUTIONS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

7

Since Гқj nj s n, this is ЕҪcy1.-dimensional, with nc s n y ЕҪ n1 q РёРёРё qncy1 .. The binomial distribution is the special case with c s 2.
For the multinomial distribution,

EЕҪ nj . s nвҗІj ,

varЕҪ nj . s nвҗІj ЕҪ1 y вҗІj . ,

covЕҪ nj , nk . s ynвҗІjвҗІ k . ЕҪ 1 .3.

We derive the covariance in Section 14.1.4. The marginal distribution of each nj is binomial.

1.2.3 Poisson Distribution
Sometimes, count data do not result from a fixed number of trials. For instance, if y s number of deaths due to automobile accidents on motorways in Italy during this coming week, there is no fixed upper limit n for y ЕҪas you are aware if you have driven in Italy.. Since y must be a nonnegative integer, its distribution should place its mass on that range. The simplest such distribution is the Poisson. Its probabilities depend on a single parameter, the mean вҗ®. The Poisson probability mass function ЕҪPoisson 1837, p. 206. is

yвҗ® y
eвҗ®

pЕҪ y. s

,

y!

y s 0, 1, 2, . . . .

ЕҪ 1 .4.

It satisfies EЕҪY . s varЕҪY . s вҗ®. It is unimodal with mode equal to the
integer part of вҗ®. Its skewness is described by EЕҪY y вҗ®.3rвҗҙ 3 s 1r'вҗ® . The
distribution approaches normality as вҗ® increases. The Poisson distribution is used for counts of events that occur randomly
over time or space, when outcomes in disjoint periods or regions are independent. It also applies as an approximation for the binomial when n is large and вҗІ is small, with вҗ® s nвҗІ . So if each of the 50 million people driving in Italy next week is an independent trial with probability 0.000002 of dying in a fatal accident that week, the number of deaths Y is a binЕҪ50000000, 0.000002. variate, or approximately Poisson with вҗ® s nвҗІ s 50,000,000ЕҪ0.000002. s 100.
A key feature of the Poisson distribution is that its variance equals its mean. Sample counts vary more when their mean is higher. When the mean number of weekly fatal accidents equals 100, greater variability occurs in the weekly counts than when the mean equals 10.

1.2.4 Overdispersion
In practice, count observations often exhibit variability exceeding that predicted by the binomial or Poisson. This phenomenon is called oВ®erdispersion. We assumed above that each person has the same probability of dying in a fatal accident in the next week. More realistically, these probabilities vary,

8

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

due to factors such as amount of time spent driving, whether the person wears a seat belt, and geographical location. Such variation causes fatality counts to display more variation than predicted by the Poisson model.
Suppose that Y is a random variable with variance varЕҪY < вҗ®. for given вҗ®, but вҗ® itself varies because of unmeasured factors such as those just described. Let вҗӘ s EЕҪвҗ®.. Then unconditionally,
EЕҪ Y . s E EЕҪ Y < вҗ®. , varЕҪ Y . s E varЕҪ Y < вҗ®. q var EЕҪ Y < вҗ®. .
When Y is conditionally Poisson ЕҪgiven вҗ®., for instance, then EЕҪY . s EЕҪвҗ®. s вҗӘ and varЕҪY . s EЕҪвҗ®. q varЕҪвҗ®. s вҗӘ q varЕҪвҗ®. ) вҗӘ.
Assuming a Poisson distribution for a count variable is often too simplistic, because of factors that cause overdispersion. The negatiВ®e binomial is a related distribution for count data that permits the variance to exceed the mean. We introduce it in Section 4.3.4.
Analyses assuming binomial ЕҪor multinomial. distributions are also sometimes invalid because of overdispersion. This might happen because the true distribution is a mixture of different binomial distributions, with the parameter varying because of unmeasured variables. To illustrate, suppose that an experiment exposes pregnant mice to a toxin and then after a week observes the number of fetuses in each mouseвҖҷs litter that show signs of malformation. Let ni denote the number of fetuses in the litter for mouse i. The mice also vary according to other factors that may not be measured, such as their weight, overall health, and genetic makeup. Extra variation then occurs because of the variability from litter to litter in the probability вҗІ of malformation. The distribution of the number of fetuses per litter showing malformations might cluster near 0 and near ni, showing more dispersion than expected for binomial sampling with a single value of вҗІ . Overdispersion could also occur when вҗІ varies among fetuses in a litter according to some distribution ЕҪProblem 1.12.. In Chapters 4, 12, and 13 we introduce methods for data that are overdispersed relative to binomial and Poisson assumptions.

1.2.5 Connection between Poisson and Multinomial Distributions
In Italy this next week, let y1 s number of people who die in automobile accidents, y2 s number who die in airplane accidents, and y3 s number who die in railway accidents. A Poisson model for ЕҪY1, Y2 , Y3. treats these as independent Poisson random variables, with parameters ЕҪвҗ®1, вҗ®2 , вҗ®3.. The joint probability mass function for Г„Yi4 is the product of the three mass functions of form ЕҪ1.4.. The total n s ГқYi also has a Poisson distribution, with parameter Гқ вҗ®i.
With Poisson sampling the total count n is random rather than fixed. If we assume a Poisson model but condition on n, Г„Yi4 no longer have Poisson distributions, since each Yi cannot exceed n. Given n, Г„Yi4 are also no longer independent, since the value of one affects the possible range for the others.

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

9

For c independent Poisson variates, with EЕҪYi. s вҗ®i, letвҖҷs derive their conditional distribution given that ГқYi s n. The conditional probability of a set of counts Г„ni4 satisfying this condition is

P ЕҪ Y1 s n1 , Y2 s n2 , . . . , Yc s nc . Гқ Yj s n
P ЕҪ Y1 s n1 , Y2 s n2 , . . . , Yc s nc .
s P ЕҪГқYj s n. s n s ЕҒ i expЕҪ yвҗ®i . вҗ®inirni! n! ЕҒ вҗІ ini ,
expЕҪyГқ вҗ®j . ЕҪГқ вҗ®j . rn! ЕҒ i ni! i

ЕҪ 1 .5.

where Г„вҗІi s вҗ®irЕҪГқ вҗ®j.4. This is the multinomial ЕҪ n, Г„вҗІi4. distribution, characterized by the sample size n and the probabilities Г„вҗІi4.
Many categorical data analyses assume a multinomial distribution. Such analyses usually have the same parameter estimates as those of analyses assuming a Poisson distribution, because of the similarity in the likelihood functions.

1.3 STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA
The choice of distribution for the response variable is but one step of data analysis. In practice, that distribution has unknown parameter values. In this section we review methods of using sample data to make inferences about the parameters. Sections 1.4 and 1.5 cover binomial and multinomial parameters.
1.3.1 Likelihood Functions and Maximum Likelihood Estimation
In this book we use maximum likelihood for parameter estimation. Under weak regularity conditions, such as the parameter space having fixed dimension with true value falling in its interior, maximum likelihood estimators have desirable properties: They have large-sample normal distributions; they are asymptotically consistent, converging to the parameter as n increases; and they are asymptotically efficient, producing large-sample standard errors no greater than those from other estimation methods.
Given the data, for a chosen probability distribution the likelihood function is the probability of those data, treated as a function of the unknown parameter. The maximum likelihood ЕҪML. estimate is the parameter value that maximizes this function. This is the parameter value under which the data observed have the highest probability of occurrence. The parameter value that maximizes the likelihood function also maximizes the log of that function. It is simpler to maximize the log likelihood since it is a sum rather than a product of terms.

10

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

We denote a parameter for a generic problem by вҗӨ and its ML estimate
by вҗӨЛҶ. The likelihood function is l ЕҪ вҗӨ . and the log-likelihood function is LЕҪ вҗӨ . s logwl ЕҪ вҗӨ .x. For many models, LЕҪ вҗӨ . has concave shape and вҗӨЛҶ is the

point at which the derivative equals 0. The ML estimate is then the solution of the likelihood equation, СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ .rСЁвҗӨ s 0. Often, вҗӨ is multidimensional,
denoted by вҗӨ, and вҗӨЛҶ is the solution of a set of likelihood equations. Let SE denote the standard error of вҗӨЛҶ, and let covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . denote the
asymptotic covariance matrix of вҗӨЛҶ. Under regularity conditions ЕҪRao 1973, p. 364., covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . is the inverse of the information matrix. The ЕҪ j, k. element of

the information matrix is

Еҫ / СЁ 2LЕҪвҗӨ.
yE СЁвҗӨjСЁвҗӨk .

ЕҪ 1 .6.

The standard errors are the square roots of the diagonal elements for the inverse information matrix. The greater the curvature of the log likelihood, the smaller the standard errors. This is reasonable, since large curvature
implies that the log likelihood drops quickly as вҗӨ moves away from вҗӨЛҶ; hence, the data would have been much more likely to occur if вҗӨ took a value near вҗӨЛҶ rather than a value far from вҗӨЛҶ.

1.3.2 Likelihood Function and ML Estimate for Binomial Parameter
The part of a likelihood function involving the parameters is called the kernel. Since the maximization of the likelihood is with respect to the
Еҫ / parameters, the rest is irrelevant. To illustrate, consider the binomial distribution ЕҪ1.1.. The binomial coefficient yn has no influence on where the maximum occurs with respect to вҗІ . Thus, we ignore it and treat the kernel as the likelihood function. The binomial log likelihood is then
LЕҪвҗІ . s log вҗІ y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . n s yy ylogЕҪвҗІ . q ЕҪ n y y . logЕҪ1 y вҗІ . . ЕҪ1.7.
Differentiating with respect to вҗІ yields
СЁ LЕҪвҗІ . rСЁвҗІ s yrвҗІ y ЕҪ n y y . rЕҪ1 y вҗІ . s ЕҪ y y nвҗІ . rвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . . ЕҪ1.8.
Equating this to 0 gives the likelihood equation, which has solution вҗІЛҶ s yrn,
the sample proportion of successes for the n trials. Calculating СЁ 2LЕҪвҗІ .rСЁвҗІ 2, taking the expectation, and combining terms,
we get
yE СЁ 2LЕҪвҗІ . rСЁвҗІ 2 s E yrвҗІ 2 q ЕҪ n y y . rЕҪ1 y вҗІ . 2 s nr вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . . ЕҪ 1 .9.

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

11

Thus, the asymptotic variance of вҗІЛҶ is вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .rn. This is no surprise. Since EЕҪY . s nвҗІ and varЕҪY . s nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ., the distribution of вҗІЛҶ s Yrn has mean

and standard error
EЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s вҗІ ,

( вҗҙ ЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s

вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .
. n

1.3.3 WaldвҖ“Likelihood RatioвҖ“Score Test Triad
Three standard ways exist to use the likelihood function to perform large-sample inference. We introduce these for a significance test of a null hypothesis H0: вҗӨ s вҗӨ0 and then discuss their relation to interval estimation. They all exploit the large-sample normality of ML estimators.
With nonnull standard error SE of вҗӨЛҶ, the test statistic
z s ЕҪвҗӨЛҶy вҗӨ0 .rSE
has an approximate standard normal distribution when вҗӨ s вҗӨ0. One refers z to the standard normal table to obtain one- or two-sided P-values. Equivalently, for the two-sided alternative, z 2 has a chi-squared null distribution with 1 degree of freedom ЕҪdf.; the P-value is then the right-tailed chi-squared probability above the observed value. This type of statistic, using the nonnull standard error, is called a Wald statistic ЕҪWald 1943..
The multivariate extension for the Wald test of H0: вҗӨ s вҗӨ0 has test statistic
W s ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ y вҗӨ0 .X covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . y1 ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ y вҗӨ0 . .
ЕҪThe prime on a vector or matrix denotes the transpose.. The nonnull
covariance is based on the curvature ЕҪ1.6. of the log likelihood at вҗӨЛҶ. The asymptotic multivariate normal distribution for вҗӨЛҶ implies an asymptotic chi-squared distribution for W. The df equal the rank of covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ ., which is the
number of nonredundant parameters in вҗӨ. A second general-purpose method uses the likelihood function through
the ratio of two maximizations: ЕҪ1. the maximum over the possible parameter values under H0, and ЕҪ2. the maximum over the larger set of parameter
values permitting H0 or an alternative Ha to be true. Let l 0 denote the maximized value of the likelihood function under H0, and let l 1 denote the
maximized value generally ЕҪi.e., under H0 j Ha.. For instance, for parameter
vector вҗӨ s ЕҪвҗӨ0, вҗӨ1.РҲ and H0: вҗӨ0 s 0, l 1 is the likelihood function calculated at the вҗӨ value for which the data would have been most likely; l 0 is the
likelihood function calculated at the вҗӨ1 value for which the data would
have been most likely, when вҗӨ0 s 0. Then l 1 is always at least as large as l 0, since l 0 results from maximizing over a restricted set of the parameter
values.

12

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

The ratio вҢі s l 0rl 1 of the maximized likelihoods cannot exceed 1. Wilks
ЕҪ1935, 1938. showed that y2 logвҢі has a limiting null chi-squared distribution, as n в„ў Пұ. The df equal the difference in the dimensions of the parameter spaces under H0 j Ha and under H0. The likelihood-ratio test statistic equals
y2 logвҢі s y2 logЕҪ l 0rl 1. s y2ЕҪ L0 y L1 . ,

where L0 and L1 denote the maximized log-likelihood functions. The third method uses the score statistic, due to R. A. Fisher and C. R.
Rao. The score test is based on the slope and expected curvature of the log-likelihood function LЕҪ вҗӨ . at the null value вҗӨ0. It utilizes the size of the score function
uЕҪ вҗӨ . s СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ . rСЁвҗӨ ,
evaluated at вҗӨ0. The value uЕҪ вҗӨ0. tends to be larger in absolute value when вҗӨЛҶ
is farther from вҗӨ0. Denote yEwСЁ 2LЕҪ вҗӨ .rСЁвҗӨ 2 x ЕҪi.e., the information. evaluated at вҗӨ0 by вҗ«ЕҪ вҗӨ0.. The score statistic is the ratio of uЕҪ вҗӨ0. to its null SE, which is wвҗ«ЕҪ вҗӨ0.x1r2 . This has an approximate standard normal null distribution. The chi-squared form of the score statistic is

uЕҪ вҗӨ0. 2

СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ . rСЁвҗӨ0 2

вҗ« ЕҪ вҗӨ0 . y s E СЁ 2LЕҪ вҗӨ . rСЁвҗӨ02 ,

where the partial derivative notation reflects derivatives with respect to вҗӨ that are evaluated at вҗӨ0. In the multiparameter case, the score statistic is a quadratic form based on the vector of partial derivatives of the log likelihood with respect to вҗӨ and the inverse information matrix, both evaluated at the H0 estimates ЕҪi.e., assuming that вҗӨ s вҗӨ0..
Figure 1.1 is a generic plot of a log-likelihood LЕҪ вҗӨ . for the univariate case. It illustrates the three tests of H0: вҗӨ s 0. The Wald test uses the
behavior of LЕҪ вҗӨ . at the ML estimate вҗӨЛҶ, having chi-squared form ЕҪ вҗӨЛҶrSE.2. The SE of вҗӨЛҶ depends on the curvature of LЕҪ вҗӨ . at вҗӨЛҶ. The score test is based
on the slope and curvature of LЕҪ вҗӨ . at вҗӨ s 0. The likelihood-ratio test
combines information about LЕҪ вҗӨ . at both вҗӨЛҶ and вҗӨ0 s 0. It compares the log-likelihood values L1 at вҗӨЛҶ and L0 at вҗӨ0 s 0 using the chi-squared
statistic y2ЕҪ L0 y L1.. In Figure 1.1, this statistic is twice the vertical dis-
tance between values of LЕҪ вҗӨ . at вҗӨЛҶ and at 0. In a sense, this statistic uses the
most information of the three types of test statistic and is the most versatile. As n в„ў Пұ, the Wald, likelihood-ratio, and score tests have certain asymp-
totic equivalences ЕҪCox and Hinkley 1974, Sec. 9.3.. For small to moderate
sample sizes, the likelihood-ratio test is usually more reliable than the Wald
test.

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

13

FIGURE 1.1 Log-likelihood function and information used in three tests of H0: вҗӨ s 0.

1.3.4 Constructing Confidence Intervals

In practice, it is more informative to construct confidence intervals for

parameters than to test hypotheses about their values. For any of the three

test methods, a confidence interval results from inverting the test. For

instance, a 95% confidence interval for вҗӨ is the set of вҗӨ0 for which the test of H0: вҗӨ s вҗӨ0 has a P-value exceeding 0.05.

Let za denote the z-score from the standard normal distribution having right-tailed probability a; this is the 100ЕҪ1 y a. percentile of that distribution. Let вҗ№df2 ЕҪ a. denote the 100ЕҪ1 y a. percentile of the chi-squared distribution with degrees of freedom df. 100ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ .% confidence intervals based on

asymptotic normality use zвҗЈr2 , for instance z0.025 s 1.96 for 95% confidence.

The Wald confidence interval is the set of вҗӨ0 for which < вҗӨЛҶy вҗӨ0 < rSE - zвҗЈ r2 .

This gives the interval вҗӨЛҶ" zвҗЈr2ЕҪSE.. The likelihood-ratio-based confidence

interval

is

the

set

of

вҗӨ0

for

which

y2w

LЕҪ

вҗӨ

0

.

y

LЕҪ

вҗӨЛҶ.x

-

вҗ№

2 1

ЕҪвҗЈ..

wRecall

that

вҗ№

2 1

ЕҪвҗЈ.

s

2
zвҗЈ

r2

.x

When вҗӨЛҶ has a normal distribution, the log-likelihood function has a

parabolic shape ЕҪi.e., a second-degree polynomial.. For small samples with

categorical data, вҗӨЛҶ may be far from normality and the log-likelihood function

can be far from a symmetric, parabolic-shaped curve. This can also happen

with moderate to large samples when a model contains many parameters. In
such cases, inference based on asymptotic normality of вҗӨЛҶ may have inade-

quate performance. A marked divergence in results of Wald and likelihood-
ratio inference indicates that the distribution of вҗӨЛҶ may not be close to

normality. The example in Section 1.4.3 illustrates this with quite different

confidence intervals for different methods. In many such cases, inference can

14

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

instead utilize an exact small-sample distribution or вҖҳвҖҳhigher-orderвҖҷвҖҷ asymptotic methods that improve on simple normality ЕҪe.g., Pierce and Peters 1992..
The Wald confidence interval is most common in practice because it is simple to construct using ML estimates and standard errors reported by statistical software. The likelihood-ratio-based interval is becoming more widely available in software and is preferable for categorical data with small to moderate n. For the best known statistical model, regression for a normal response, the three types of inference necessarily provide identical results.

1.4 STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR BINOMIAL PARAMETERS
In this section we illustrate inference methods for categorical data by presenting tests and confidence intervals for the binomial parameter вҗІ , based on y successes in n independent trials. In Section 1.3.2 we obtained
the likelihood function and ML estimator вҗІЛҶ s yrn of вҗІ .

1.4.1 Tests about a Binomial Parameter
Consider H0: вҗІ s вҗІ 0. Since H0 has a single parameter, we use the normal rather than chi-squared forms of Wald and score test statistics. They permit tests against one-sided as well as two-sided alternatives. The Wald statistic is

вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ 0

вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ 0

zW s SE s 'вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . rn .

ЕҪ 1 .10.

Evaluating the binomial score ЕҪ1.8. and information ЕҪ1.9. at вҗІ 0 yields

uЕҪвҗІ 0 . s y y n , y y
вҗІ0 1yвҗІ0

вҗ«ЕҪвҗІ0. s n . вҗІ0ЕҪ1 y вҗІ0.

The normal form of the score statistic simplifies to

zS s

uЕҪвҗІ 0 .

y y nвҗІ 0

вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ 0

вҗ« ЕҪвҗІ 0 . 1r2 s 'nвҗІ 0 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0 . s 'вҗІ 0 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0 . rn .

ЕҪ 1 .11.

Whereas the Wald statistic zW uses the standard error evaluated at вҗІЛҶ , the
score statistic zS uses it evaluated at вҗІ 0. The score statistic is preferable, as it uses the actual null SE rather than an estimate. Its null sampling distribu-
tion is closer to standard normal than that of the Wald statistic. The binomial log-likelihood function ЕҪ1.7. equals L0 s ylogвҗІ 0 q
ЕҪ n y y. logЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0. under H0 and L1 s y log вҗІЛҶ q ЕҪ n y y. logЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . more

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR BINOMIAL PARAMETERS

15

generally. The likelihood-ratio test statistic simplifies to

Еҫ / y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. s 2 y log q вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ n y y. log 1 . y вҗІЛҶ

вҗІ0

1 y вҗІ0

Expressed as

Еҫ / y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. s 2 y log q y ЕҪ n y y. log n , y y

nвҗІ 0

n y nвҗІ 0

it compares observed success and failure counts to fitted ЕҪi.e., null. counts by

2 Гқ observed log observed .
fitted

ЕҪ 1 .12.

WeвҖҷll see that this formula also holds for tests about Poisson and multinomial parameters. Since no unknown parameters occur under H0 and one occurs under Ha, ЕҪ1.12. has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with df s 1.

1.4.2 Confidence Intervals for a Binomial Parameter

A significance test merely indicates whether a particular вҗІ value ЕҪsuch as вҗІ s 0.5. is plausible. We learn more by using a confidence interval to

determine the range of plausible values.

( Inverting the Wald test statistic gives the interval of вҗІ 0
< zW < - zвҗЈ r2 , or

вҗІЛҶ " zвҗЈr2

вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ .
. n

values for which
ЕҪ 1 .13.

Historically, this was one of the first confidence intervals used for any parameter ЕҪLaplace 1812, p. 283.. Unfortunately, it performs poorly unless n is very large ЕҪe.g., Brown et al. 2001.. The actual coverage probability usually

falls below the nominal confidence coefficient, much below when вҗІ is near 0

or

1.

A

simple

adjustment

that

adds

12
2 zвҗЈ r2

observations

of

each

type

to

the

sample before using this formula performs much better ЕҪProblem 1.24..

The score confidence interval contains вҗІ 0 values for which < zS < - zвҗЈ r2 . Its endpoints are the вҗІ 0 solutions to the equations

ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ 0 . r'вҗІ 0 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0 . rn s "zвҗЈ r2 .

16

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

These are quadratic in вҗІ 0. First discussed by E. B. Wilson ЕҪ1927., this interval is

n

2

1

zвҗЈ r2

Еҫ / Еҫ / вҗІЛҶ

2q

2

n q zвҗЈr2

2 n q zвҗЈ r2

) Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / "zвҗЈr2

2 1 вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . 2 q 2 n 1 1 zвҗЈ . 2r2

n q zвҗЈr2

n q zвҗЈ r2

2 2 n q zвҗЈ r2

The midpoint вҗІЛң of the interval is a weighted average of вҗІЛҶ and 21 , where the

weight

nrЕҪ

n

q

2
zвҗЈ

r2

.

given

вҗІЛҶ

increases

as

n

increases.

Combining terms,

this

midpoint

equals

вҗІЛң

s

ЕҪ

y

q

zвҗЈ2r2r2.rЕҪ n

q

2
zвҗЈ r2

..

This

is

the

sample

proportion

for an adjusted

sample

that

adds

2
zвҗЈ r2

observations,

half

of each

type.

The

square of the coefficient of zвҗЈr2 in this formula is a weighted average of the

variance of a sample proportion when вҗІ s вҗІЛҶ and the variance of a sample

proportion

when

вҗІ s 21 ,

using

the

adjusted

sample

size

n

q

2
zвҗЈ

r2

in

place

of n. This interval has much better performance than the Wald interval.

The likelihood-ratio-based confidence interval is more complex computa-

tionally, but simple in principle. It is the set of вҗІ 0 for which the likelihoodratio test has a P-value exceeding вҗЈ. Equivalently, it is the set of вҗІ 0 for which double the log likelihood drops by less than вҗ№12ЕҪвҗЈ. from its value at the
ML estimate вҗІЛҶ s yrn.

1.4.3 Proportion of Vegetarians Example
To collect data in an introductory statistics course, recently I gave the students a questionnaire. One question asked each student whether he or she was a vegetarian. Of n s 25 students, y s 0 answered вҖҳвҖҳ yes.вҖҷвҖҷ They were not a random sample of a particular population, but we use these data to illustrate 95% confidence intervals for a binomial parameter вҗІ .
Since y s 0, вҗІЛҶ s 0r25 s 0. Using the Wald approach, the 95% confi-
dence interval for вҗІ is
0 " 1.96'ЕҪ0.0 = 1.0. r25 , or ЕҪ0, 0. .

When the observation falls at the boundary of the sample space, often Wald
methods do not provide sensible answers. By contrast, the 95% score interval equals ЕҪ0.0, 0.133.. This is a more
believable inference. For H0: вҗІ s 0.5, for instance, the score test statistic is
zS s ЕҪ0 y 0.5.r'ЕҪ0.5 = 0.5. r25 s y5.0, so 0.5 does not fall in the interval. By contrast, for H0: вҗІ s 0.10, zS s ЕҪ0 y 0.10.r'ЕҪ0.10 = 0.90. r25 s y1.67,
so 0.10 falls in the interval.

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR BINOMIAL PARAMETERS

17

When y s 0 and n s 25, the kernel of the likelihood function is l ЕҪвҗІ . s
вҗІ 0ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .25 s ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .25. The log likelihood ЕҪ1.7. is LЕҪвҗІ . s 25 logЕҪ1 y вҗІ ..
Note that LЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s LЕҪ0. s 0. The 95% likelihood-ratio confidence interval is
the set of вҗІ 0 for which the likelihood-ratio statistic

y2ЕҪ L0 y L1 . s y2 LЕҪвҗІ 0 . y LЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s y50 logЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0 . F вҗ№12 ЕҪ0.05. s 3.84.

The upper bound is 1 y expЕҪy3.84r50. s 0.074, and the confidence interval equals ЕҪ0.0, 0.074.. wIn this book, we use the natural logarithm throughout, so its inverse is the exponential function expЕҪ x. s e x.x Figure 1.2 shows the
likelihood and log-likelihood functions and the corresponding confidence region for вҗІ .
The three large-sample methods yield quite different results. When вҗІ is
near 0, the sampling distribution of вҗІЛҶ is highly skewed to the right for small
n. It is worth considering alternative methods not requiring asymptotic
approximations.

FIGURE 1.2 Binomial likelihood and log likelihood when y s 0 in n s 25 trials, and confidence interval for вҗІ .

18

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

1.4.4 Exact Small-Sample Inference*1
With modern computational power, it is not necessary to rely on large-sam-
ple approximations for the distribution of statistics such as вҗІЛҶ . Tests and
confidence intervals can use the binomial distribution directly rather than its normal approximation. Such inferences occur naturally for small samples, but apply for any n.
We illustrate by testing H0: вҗІ s 0.5 against Ha: вҗІ / 0.5 for the survey results on vegetarianism, y s 0 with n s 25. We noted that the score statistic equals z s y5.0. The exact P-value for this statistic, based on the null binЕҪ25, 0.5. distribution, is

P ЕҪ < z < G 5.0. s P ЕҪ Y s 0 or Y s 25. s 0.525 q 0.525 s 0.00000006.

100ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ .% confidence intervals consist of all вҗІ 0 for which P-values exceed вҗЈ in exact binomial tests. The best known interval ЕҪClopper and Pearson 1934. uses the tail method for forming confidence intervals. It requires each one-sided P-value to exceed вҗЈr2. The lower and upper endpoints are the solutions in вҗІ 0 to the equations

Еҫ / Еҫ / n n k nyk
Гқ вҗІ 0 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0 . s вҗЈr2 and
ksy k

y

nk

nyk

Гқ вҗІ 0 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 0 . s вҗЈr2,

ks0 k

except that the lower bound is 0 when y s 0 and the upper bound is 1 when y s n. When y s 1, 2, . . . , n y 1, from connections between binomial sums and the incomplete beta function and related cumulative distribution functions ЕҪcdfвҖҷs. of beta and F distributions, the confidence interval equals

n y y q 1 y1

n y y y1

1q yF2 y, 2ЕҪ nyyq1. ЕҪ 1 y вҗЈr2. -вҗІ- 1 q ЕҪ y q 1. F2ЕҪ yq1. , 2ЕҪ nyy .ЕҪвҗЈr2. ,

where Fa, bЕҪc. denotes the 1 y c quantile from the F distribution with degrees of freedom a and b. When y s 0 with n s 25, the ClopperбҺҗPearson 95% confidence interval for вҗІ is ЕҪ0.0, 0.137..
In principle this approach seems ideal. However, there is a serious
complication. Because of discreteness, the actual coverage probability for any вҗІ is at least as large as the nominal confidence level ЕҪCasella and Berger 2001, p. 434; Neyman 1935. and it can be much greater. Similarly, for a test of H0: вҗІ s вҗІ 0 at a fixed desired size вҗЈ such as 0.05, it is not usually possible to achieve that size. There is a finite number of possible samples, and hence
a finite number of possible P-values, of which 0.05 may not be one. In testing H0 with fixed вҗІ 0, one can pick a particular вҗЈ that can occur as a P-value.

1Sections marked with an asterisk are less important for an overview.

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR BINOMIAL PARAMETERS

19

FIGURE 1.3 Plot of coverage probabilities for nominal 95% confidence intervals for binomial parameter вҗІ when n s 25.
For interval estimation, however, this is not an option. This is because constructing the interval corresponds to inverting an entire range of вҗІ 0 values in H0: вҗІ s вҗІ 0, and each distinct вҗІ 0 value can have its own set of possible P-values; that is, there is not a single null parameter value вҗІ 0 as in one test.
For any fixed parameter value, the actual coverage probability can be much larger than the nominal confidence level. When n s 25, Figure 1.3 plots the coverage probabilities as a function of вҗІ for the ClopperбҺҗPearson method, the score method, and the Wald method. At a fixed вҗІ value with a given method, the coverage probability is the sum of the binomial probabilities of all those samples for which the resulting interval contains that вҗІ . There are 26 possible samples and 26 corresponding confidence intervals, so the coverage probability is a sum of somewhere between 0 and 26 binomial probabilities. As вҗІ moves from 0 to 1, this coverage probability jumps up or down whenever вҗІ moves into or out of one of these intervals. Figure 1.3 shows that coverage probabilities are too low for the Wald method, whereas the ClopperбҺҗPearson method errs in the opposite direction. The score method behaves well, except for some вҗІ values close to 0 or 1. Its coverage probabilities tend to be near the nominal level, not being consistently conservative or liberal. This is a good method unless вҗІ is very close to 0 or 1 ЕҪProblem 1.23..
In discrete problems using small-sample distributions, shorter confidence intervals usually result from inverting a single two-sided test rather than two

20

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

one-sided tests. The interval is then the set of parameter values for which the P-value of a two-sided test exceeds вҗЈ. For the binomial parameter, see Blaker ЕҪ2000., Blyth and Still ЕҪ1983., and Sterne ЕҪ1954. for methods. For
observed outcome yo, with BlakerвҖҷs approach the P-value is the minimum of the two one-tailed binomial probabilities PЕҪY G yo. and PЕҪY F yo. plus an attainable probability in the other tail that is as close as possible to, but not
greater than, that one-tailed probability. The interval is computationally more complex, although available in software ЕҪBlaker gave S-Plus functions.. The result is still conservative, but less so than the ClopperбҺҗPearson interval.
For the vegetarianism example, the 95% confidence interval using the Blaker exact method is ЕҪ0.0, 0.128. compared to the ClopperбҺҗPearson interval of ЕҪ0.0, 0.137..

1.4.5 Inference Based on the Mid-P-Value*
To adjust for discreteness in small-sample distributions, one can base inference on the mid-P-В®alue ЕҪLancaster 1961.. For a test statistic T with observed value to and one-sided Ha such that large T contradicts H0,
mid-P-value s 21 P ЕҪ T s to . q P ЕҪ T ) to . ,
with probabilities calculated from the null distribution. Thus, the mid-P-value is less than the ordinary P-value by half the probability of the observed result. Compared to the ordinary P-value, the mid-P-value behaves more like the P-value for a test statistic having a continuous distribution. The sum of its two one-sided P-values equals 1.0. Although discrete, under H0 its null distribution is more like the uniform distribution that occurs in the continuous case. For instance, it has a null expected value of 0.5, whereas this expected value exceeds 0.5 for the ordinary P-value for a discrete test statistic.
Unlike an exact test with ordinary P-value, a test using the mid-P-value does not guarantee that the probability of type I error is no greater than a nominal value ЕҪProblem 1.19.. However, it usually performs well, typically being a bit conservative. It is less conservative than the ordinary exact test. Similarly, one can form less conservative confidence intervals by inverting tests using the exact distribution with the mid-P-value ЕҪe.g., the 95% confidence interval is the set of parameter values for which the mid-P-value exceeds 0.05..
For testing H0: вҗІ s 0.5 against Ha: вҗІ / 0.5 in the example about the proportion of vegetarians, with y s 0 for n s 25, the result observed is the most extreme possible. Thus the mid-P-value is half the ordinary P-value, or 0.00000003. Using the ClopperбҺҗPearson inversion of the exact binomial test but with the mid-P-value yields a 95% confidence interval of ЕҪ0.000, 0.113. for вҗІ , compared to ЕҪ0.000, 0.137. for the ordinary ClopperбҺҗPearson interval.
The mid-P-value seems a sensible compromise between having overly conservative inference and using irrelevant randomization to eliminate prob-

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR MULTINOMIAL PARAMETERS

21

lems from discreteness. We recommend it both for tests and confidence intervals with highly discrete distributions.

1.5 STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR MULTINOMIAL PARAMETERS
We now present inference for multinomial parameters Г„вҗІj4. Of n observations, nj occur in category j, j s 1, . . . , c.

1.5.1 Estimation of Multinomial Parameters First, we obtain ML estimates of Г„вҗІj4. As a function of Г„вҗІj4, the multinomial probability mass function ЕҪ1.2. is proportional to the kernel

ЕҒ

вҗІ

n j

j

where

all вҗІj G 0

and

ГқвҗІj s 1.

j

j

ЕҪ 1 .14.

The ML estimates are the Г„вҗІj4 that maximize ЕҪ1.14.. The multinomial log-likelihood function is

LЕҪ вҗІ . s Гқ nj log вҗІj .
j

To eliminate redundancies, we treat L as a function of ЕҪвҗІ 1, . . . , вҗІcy1 ., since вҗІc s 1 y ЕҪвҗІ 1 q РёРёРё qвҗІcy1 .. Thus, СЁвҗІcrСЁвҗІj s y1, j s 1, . . . , c y 1.
Since

s s y СЁ log вҗІc 1 СЁвҗІc 1 ,

СЁвҗІj

вҗІc СЁвҗІ j

вҗІc

differentiating LЕҪ вҗІ. with respect to вҗІj gives the likelihood equation

s y s СЁ LЕҪ вҗІ . nj nc 0 .

СЁвҗІj

вҗІ j вҗІc

The ML solution satisfies вҗІЛҶjrвҗІЛҶc s njrnc. Now

Еҫ / вҗІЛҶc
Гқ вҗІЛҶj s 1 s
j

Гқ nj
j
nc

s вҗІЛҶc n ,
nc

so вҗІЛҶc s ncrn and then вҗІЛҶj s njrn. From general results presented later in
the book ЕҪSection 8.6., this solution does maximize the likelihood. Thus, the ML estimates of Г„вҗІj4 are the sample proportions.

22

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

1.5.2 Pearson Statistic for Testing a Specified Multinomial

In 1900 the eminent British statistician Karl Pearson introduced a hypothesis test that was one of the first inferential methods. It had a revolutionary impact on categorical data analysis, which had focused on describing associations. PearsonвҖҷs test evaluates whether multinomial parameters equal certain specified values. His original motivation in developing this test was to analyze whether possible outcomes on a particular Monte Carlo roulette wheel were equally likely ЕҪStigler 1986..
Consider H0: вҗІj s вҗІj0 , j s 1, . . . , c, where ГқjвҗІ j0 s 1. When H0 is true, the expected values of Г„nj4, called expected frequencies, are вҗ®j s nвҗІj0, j s 1, . . . , c. Pearson proposed the test statistic

X 2 ЕҪ n s Гқ j y вҗ®j . 2 .

j

вҗ®j

ЕҪ 1 .15.

Greater differences Г„nj y вҗ®j4 produce greater X 2 values, for fixed n. Let Xo2

denote the observed value of X 2. The P-value is the null value of PЕҪ X 2 G

Xo2 .. This equals the sum of the null multinomial probabilities of all count

arrays ЕҪhaving a sum of n. with X 2 G Xo2.

For large samples, X 2 has approximately a chi-squared distribution with

df

s

c y 1. The

P-value is approximated by

PЕҪ вҗ№cy1 2

G

X

2 o

.,

where

вҗ№cy1 2

denotes a chi-squared random variable with df s c y 1. Statistic ЕҪ1.15. is

called the Pearson chi-squared statistic.

1.5.3 Example: Testing MendelвҖҷs Theories

Among its many applications, PearsonвҖҷs test was used in genetics to test

MendelвҖҷs theories of natural inheritance. Mendel crossed pea plants of pure

yellow strain with plants of pure green strain. He predicted that second-gen-

eration hybrid seeds would be 75% yellow and 25% green, yellow being the

dominant strain. One experiment produced n s 8023 seeds, of which n1 s

6022 were yellow and n2 s 2001 were green. The expected frequencies for H0: вҗІ 10 s 0.75, вҗІ 20 s 0.25 are вҗ®1 s 8023ЕҪ0.75. s 6017.25 and вҗ®2 s 2005.75. The Pearson statistic X 2 s 0.015 ЕҪdf s 1. has a P-value of P s 0.90. This

does not contradict MendelвҖҷs hypothesis.

Mendel performed several experiments of this type. In 1936, R. A. Fisher

summarized MendelвҖҷs results. He used the reproductive property of chi-

squared: If

X

2 1

,

.

.

.

,

Xk2 are independent chi-squared statistics with degrees

of freedom вҗҜ 1, . . . , вҗҜ k , then Гқi Xi2 has a chi-squared distribution with df s

ГқiвҗҜi. Fisher obtained a summary chi-squared statistic equal to 42, with

df s 84. A chi-squared distribution with df s 84 has mean 84 and standard deviation ЕҪ2 = 84.1r2 s 13.0, and the right-tailed probability above 42 is

P s 0.99996. In other words, the chi-squared statistic was so small that the fit

seemed too good.

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR MULTINOMIAL PARAMETERS

23

Fisher commented: вҖҳвҖҳThe general level of agreement between MendelвҖҷs expectations and his reported results shows that it is closer than would be expected in the best of several thousand repetitions . . . . I have no doubt that Mendel was deceived by a gardening assistant, who knew only too well what his principal expected from each trial made.вҖҷвҖҷ In a letter written at the time ЕҪsee Box 1978, p. 297., he stated: вҖҳвҖҳNow, when data have been faked, I know very well how generally people underestimate the frequency of wide chance deviations, so that the tendency is always to make them agree too well with expectations.вҖҷвҖҷ In summary, goodness-of-fit tests can reveal not only when a fit is inadequate, but also when it is better than random fluctuations would have us expect. wR. A. FisherвҖҷs daughter, Joan Fisher Box ЕҪ1978, pp. 295бҺҗ300., and Freedman et al. ЕҪ1978, pp. 420бҺҗ428, 478. discussed FisherвҖҷs analysis of MendelвҖҷs data and the accompanying controversy. Despite possible difficulties with MendelвҖҷs data, subsequent work led to general acceptance of his theories.x

1.5.4 Chi-Squared Theoretical Justification*

We now outline why PearsonвҖҷs statistic has a limiting chi-squared distribution. For a multinomial sample ЕҪ n1, . . . , nc. of size n, the marginal distribution of nj is the binЕҪ n,вҗІ j. distribution. For large n, by the normal approxima-
tion to the binomial, nj ЕҪand вҗІЛҶj s njrn. have approximate normal distribu-
tions. More generally, by the central limit theorem, the sample proportions
вҗІЛҶ s ЕҪ n1rn, . . . , ncy1rn.X have an approximate multivariate normal distribu-
tion ЕҪSection 14.1.4.. Let вҢә0 denote the null covariance matrix of 'n вҗІЛҶ , and let вҗІ0 s ЕҪвҗІ 10 , . . . , вҗІcy1,0 .X. Under H0 , since 'n ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0 . converges to a
NЕҪ0, вҢә0. distribution, the quadratic form

nЕҪ вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0 .X вҢә0y1 ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0 .

ЕҪ 1 .16.

has distribution converging to chi-squared with df s c y 1.
In Section 14.1.4 we show that the covariance matrix of 'n вҗІЛҶ has elements

ВҪвҗҙjk s

yвҗІ jвҗІ k
вҗІjЕҪ1 y вҗІj.

if j / k if j s k .

The matrix вҢә0y1 has ЕҪ j, k.th element 1rвҗІc0 when j / k and ЕҪ1rвҗІj0 q 1rвҗІc0 . when j s k. ЕҪYou can verify this by showing that вҢә0 вҢә0y1 equals the identity matrix.. With this substitution, direct calculation ЕҪwith appropriate combining of terms. shows that ЕҪ1.16. simplifies to X 2. In Section 14.3 we provide a formal proof in a more general setting.
This argument is similar to PearsonвҖҷs in 1900. R. A. Fisher ЕҪ1922. gave a simpler justification, the gist of which follows: Suppose that ЕҪ n1, . . . , nc. are independent Poisson random variables with means ЕҪвҗ®1, . . . , вҗ®c.. For large

24

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

Г„вҗ®j4, the standardized values Г„ zj s ЕҪ nj y вҗ®j.r'вҗ®j 4 have approximate stan-

dard

normal distributions.

Thus,

Гқ

j

z

2 j

s

X

2

has

an approximate

chi-squared

distribution with c degrees of freedom. Adding the single linear constraint ГқjЕҪ nj y вҗ®j. s 0, thus converting the Poisson distributions to a multinomial,

we lose a degree of freedom.

When c s 2, PearsonвҖҷs X 2 simplifies to the square of the normal score
statistic ЕҪ1.11.. For MendelвҖҷs data, вҗІЛҶ 1 s 6022r8023, вҗІ 10 s 0.75, n s 8023,
and zS s 0.123, for which X 2 s ЕҪ0.123.2 s 0.015. In fact, for general c the

Pearson test is the score test about multinomial parameters.

1.5.5 Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared An alternative test for multinomial parameters uses the likelihood-ratio test. The kernel of the multinomial likelihood is ЕҪ1.14.. Under H0 the likelihood is
maximized when вҗІЛҶj s вҗІj0. In the general case, it is maximized when вҗІЛҶj s
njrn. The ratio of the likelihoods equals
ЕҒ jЕҪвҗІj0 . nj
вҢі s ЕҒ j ЕҪ njrn. nj .

Thus, the likelihood-ratio statistic, denoted by G2, is

G2 s y2 logвҢі s 2 Гқ nj logЕҪ njrnвҗІj0 . .

ЕҪ 1 .17.

This statistic, which has form ЕҪ1.12., is called the likelihood-ratio chi-squared statistic. The larger the value of G2, the greater the evidence against H0.
In the general case, the parameter space consists of Г„вҗІj4 subject to ГқjвҗІj s 1, so the dimensionality is c y 1. Under H0, the Г„вҗІj4 are specified completely, so the dimension is 0. The difference in these dimensions equals ЕҪc y 1.. For large n, G2 has a chi-squared null distribution with df s c y 1.
When H0 holds, the Pearson X 2 and the likelihood ratio G2 both have asymptotic chi-squared distributions with df s c y 1. In fact, they are asymptotically equivalent in that case; specifically, X 2 y G2 converges in probability to zero ЕҪSection 14.3.4.. When H0 is false, they tend to grow proportionally to n; they need not take similar values, however, even for very large n.
For fixed c, as n increases the distribution of X 2 usually converges to chi-squared more quickly than that of G2. The chi-squared approximation is usually poor for G2 when nrc - 5. When c is large, it can be decent for X 2 for nrc as small as 1 if the table does not contain both very small and
moderately large expected frequencies. We provide further guidelines in
Section 9.8.4. Alternatively, one can use the multinomial probabilities to generate exact distributions of these test statistics ЕҪGood et al. 1970..

STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR MULTINOMIAL PARAMETERS

25

1.5.6 Testing with Estimated Expected Frequencies
PearsonвҖҷs X 2 ЕҪ1.15. compares a sample distribution to a hypothetical one Г„вҗІj04. In some applications, Г„вҗІj0 s вҗІj0ЕҪвҗӘ.4 are functions of a smaller set of
unknown parameters вҗӘ. ML estimates ЛҶвҗӘ of вҗӘ determine ML estimates Г„вҗІj0ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ.4 of Г„вҗІj04 and hence ML estimates Г„вҗ®ЛҶ j s nвҗІj0ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ.4 of expected frequencies in X 2. Replacing Г„вҗ®j4 by estimates Г„вҗ®ЛҶ j4 affects the distribution of X 2.
When dimЕҪвҗӘ. s p, the true df s ЕҪc y 1. y p ЕҪSection 14.3.3.. Pearson failed to realize this ЕҪSection 16.2..
We now show a goodness-to-fit test with estimated expected frequencies. A sample of 156 dairy calves born in Okeechobee County, Florida, were classified according to whether they caught pneumonia within 60 days of birth. Calves that got a pneumonia infection were also classified according to whether they got a secondary infection within 2 weeks after the first infection cleared up. Table 1.1 shows the data. Calves that did not get a primary infection could not get a secondary infection, so no observations can fall in the category for вҖҳвҖҳnoвҖҷвҖҷ primary infection and вҖҳвҖҳ yesвҖҷвҖҷ secondary infection. That combination is called a structural zero.
A goal of this study was to test whether the probability of primary infection was the same as the conditional probability of secondary infection, given that the calf got the primary infection. In other words, if вҗІab denotes the probability that a calf is classified in row a and column b of this table, the null hypothesis is
H0 : вҗІ 11 q вҗІ 12 s вҗІ 11rЕҪ вҗІ 11 q вҗІ 12 .
or вҗІ 11 s ЕҪвҗІ 11 q вҗІ 12 .2. Let вҗІ s вҗІ 11 q вҗІ 12 denote the probability of primary infection. The null hypothesis states that the probabilities satisfy the structure that Table 1.2 shows; that is, probabilities in a trinomial for the categories ЕҪyesбҺҗyes, yesбҺҗno, noбҺҗno. for primaryбҺҗsecondary infection equal ЕҪвҗІ 2, вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ., 1 y вҗІ ..
Let nab denote the number of observations in category ЕҪ a, b.. The ML estimate of вҗІ is the value maximizing the kernel of the multinomial likelihood
ЕҪ вҗІ 2 . n11 ЕҪ вҗІ y вҗІ 2 . n12 ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ . n22 .

TABLE 1.1 Primary and Secondary Pneumonia Infections in Calves

Secondary Infectiona

Primary Infection
Yes No

Yes 30 ЕҪ38.1. 0 ЕҪбҺҸ.

No 63 ЕҪ39.0. 63 ЕҪ78.9.

Source: Data courtesy of Thang Tran and G. A. Donovan, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida. aValues in parentheses are estimated expected frequencies.

26

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE 1.2
Primary Infection Yes No

Probability Structure for Hypothesis Secondary Infection

Yes

No

вҗІ2

вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .

бҺҸ

1yвҗІ

Total
вҗІ 1yвҗІ

The log likelihood is

LЕҪвҗІ . s n11 log вҗІ 2 q n12 logЕҪвҗІ y вҗІ 2 . q n22 logЕҪ1 y вҗІ . .

Differentiation with respect to вҗІ gives the likelihood equation

q y y s 2 n11 n12 n12 n22 0.

вҗІ

вҗІ 1yвҗІ 1yвҗІ

The solution is

вҗІЛҶ s ЕҪ2 n11 q n12 . rЕҪ2 n11 q 2 n12 q n22 . .

For Table 1.1, вҗІЛҶ s 0.494. Since n s 156, the estimated expected frequencies are вҗ®ЛҶ11 s nвҗІЛҶ 2 s 38.1, вҗ®ЛҶ12 s nЕҪвҗІЛҶ y вҗІЛҶ 2 . s 39.0, and вҗ®ЛҶ22 s nЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . s
78.9. Table 1.1 shows them. PearsonвҖҷs statistic is X 2 s 19.7. Since the c s 3 possible responses have p s 1 parameter ЕҪвҗІ . determining the expected frequencies, df s ЕҪ3 y 1. y 1 s 1. There is strong evidence against H0 ЕҪ P s 0.00001.. Inspection of Table 1.1 reveals that many more calves got a primary
infection but not a secondary infection than H0 predicts. The researchers concluded that the primary infection had an immunizing effect that reduced
the likelihood of a secondary infection.

NOTES
Section 1.1: Categorical Response Data 1.1. Stevens ЕҪ1951. defined ЕҪnominal, ordinal, interval. scales of measurement. Other scales
result from mixtures of these types. For instance, partially ordered scales occur when subjects respond to questions having categories ordered except for donвҖҷt know or undecided categories.
Section 1.3: Statistical Inference for Categorical Data
1.2. The score method does not use вҗӨЛҶ. Thus, when вҗӨ is a model parameter, one can usually
compute the score statistic for testing H0: вҗӨ s вҗӨ0 without fitting the model. This is advantageous when fitting several models in an exploratory analysis and model fitting is computationally intensive. An advantage of the score and likelihood-ratio methods is that

PROBLEMS

27

they apply even when < вҗӨЛҶ < s Пұ. In that case, one cannot compute the Wald statistic.
Another disadvantage of the Wald method is that its results depend on the parameteriza-
tion; inference based on вҗӨЛҶ and its SE is not equivalent to inference based on a nonlinear function of it, such as log вҗӨЛҶ and its SE.

Section 1.4: Statistical Inference for Binomial Parameters
1.3. Among others, Agresti and Coull ЕҪ1998., Blyth and Still ЕҪ1983., Brown et al. ЕҪ2001., Ghosh ЕҪ1979., and Newcombe ЕҪ1998a. showed the superiority of the score interval to the Wald interval for вҗІ . Of the вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ methods, BlakerвҖҷs ЕҪ2000. has particularly good properties. It is contained in the ClopperбҺҗPearson interval and has a nestedness property whereby an interval of higher nominal confidence level necessarily contains one of lower level.
1.4. Using continuity corrections with large-sample methods provides approximations to exact small-sample methods. Thus, they tend to behave conservatively. We do not present them, since if one prefers an exact method, with modern computational power it can be used directly rather than approximated.
1.5. In theory, one can eliminate problems with discreteness in tests by performing a supplementary randomization on the boundary of a critical region ЕҪsee Problem 1.19.. In rejecting the null at the boundary with a certain probability, one can obtain a fixed overall type I error probability вҗЈ even when it is not an achievable P-value. For such randomization, the one-sided P y value is
randomized P-value s U = P ЕҪT s to . q P ЕҪT ) to . ,
where U denotes a uniform ЕҪ0, 1. random variable ЕҪStevens 1950.. In practice, this is not used, as it is absurd to let this random number influence a decision. The mid P-value replaces the arbitrary uniform multiple U = PЕҪT s to. by its expected value.

Section 1.5: Statistical Inference for Multinomial Parameters 1.6. The chi-squared distribution has mean df, variance 2 df, and skewness ЕҪ8rdf.1r2 . It is
approximately normal when df is large. Greenwood and Nikulin ЕҪ1996., Kendall and Stuart ЕҪ1979., and Lancaster ЕҪ1969. presented other properties. Cochran ЕҪ1952. presented a historical survey of chi-squared tests of fit. See also Cressie and Read ЕҪ1989., Koch and Bhapkar ЕҪ1982., Koehler ЕҪ1998., and Moore ЕҪ1986b..

PROBLEMS
Applications
1.1 Identify each variable as nominal, ordinal, or interval. a. UK political party preference ЕҪLabour, Conservative, Social Democrat. b. Anxiety rating ЕҪnone, mild, moderate, severe, very severe. c. Patient survival ЕҪin number of months. d. Clinic location ЕҪLondon, Boston, Madison, Rochester, Montreal.

28

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

e. Response of tumor to chemotherapy ЕҪcomplete elimination, partial reduction, stable, growth progression.
f. Favorite beverage ЕҪwater, juice, milk, soft drink, beer, wine. g. Appraisal of companyвҖҷs inventory level ЕҪtoo low, about right, too
high.

1.2 Each of 100 multiple-choice questions on an exam has four possible answers, one of which is correct. For each question, a student guesses by selecting an answer randomly. a. Specify the distribution of the studentXs number of correct answers.
b. Find the mean and standard deviation of that distribution. Would it be surprising if the student made at least 50 correct responses? Why?
c. Specify the distribution of ЕҪ n1, n2 , n3, n4., where nj is the number of times the student picked choice j.
d. Find EЕҪ nj., var ЕҪ nj., covЕҪ nj, nk ., and corr ЕҪ nj, nk ..

1.3 An experiment studies the number of insects that survive a certain dose of an insecticide, using several batches of insects of size n each. The insects are sensitive to factors that vary among batches during the experiment but were not measured, such as temperature level. Explain why the distribution of the number of insects per batch surviving the experiment might show overdispersion relative to a binЕҪ n, вҗІ . distribution.

1.4 In his autobiography A Sort of Life, British author Graham Greene described a period of severe mental depression during which he played Russian Roulette. This вҖҳвҖҳgameвҖҷвҖҷ consists of putting a bullet in one of the six chambers of a pistol, spinning the chambers to select one at random, and then firing the pistol once at oneвҖҷs head.
a. Greene played this game six times and was lucky that none of them resulted in a bullet firing. Find the probability of this outcome.
b. Suppose that he had kept playing this game until the bullet fired. Let Y denote the number of the game on which it fires. Show the probability mass function for Y, and justify.

1.5 Consider the statement, вҖҳвҖҳPlease tell me whether or not you think it should be possible for a pregnant woman to obtain a legal abortion if she is married and does not want any more children.вҖҷвҖҷ For the 1996 General Social Survey, conducted by the National Opinion Research Center ЕҪNORC., 842 replied вҖҳвҖҳ yesвҖҷвҖҷ and 982 replied вҖҳвҖҳno.вҖҷвҖҷ Let вҗІ denote

PROBLEMS

29

the population proportion who would reply вҖҳвҖҳ yes.вҖҷвҖҷ Find the P-value for testing H0: вҗІ s 0.5 using the score test, and construct a 95% confidence interval for вҗІ . Interpret the results.

1.6 Refer to the vegetarianism example in Section 1.4.3. For testing H0: вҗІ s 0.5 against Ha: вҗІ / 0.5, show that: a. The likelihood-ratio statistic equals 2w25logЕҪ25r12.5.x s 34.7.
b. The chi-squared form of the score statistic equals 25.0.
c. The Wald z or chi-squared statistic is infinite.

1.7 In a crossover trial comparing a new drug to a standard, вҗІ denotes the probability that the new one is judged better. It is desired to estimate вҗІ and test H0: вҗІ s 0.5 against Ha: вҗІ / 0.5. In 20 independent observations, the new drug is better each time.
a. Find and sketch the likelihood function. Give the ML estimate of вҗІ.
b. Conduct a Wald test and construct a 95% Wald confidence interval for вҗІ . Are these sensible?
c. Conduct a score test, reporting the P-value. Construct a 95% score confidence interval. Interpret.
d. Conduct a likelihood-ratio test and construct a likelihood-based 95% confidence interval. Interpret.
e. Construct an exact binomial test and 95% confidence interval. Interpret.
f. Suppose that researchers wanted a sufficiently large sample to estimate the probability of preferring the new drug to within 0.05, with confidence 0.95. If the true probability is 0.90, about how large a sample is needed?

1.8 In an experiment on chlorophyll inheritance in maize, for 1103 seedlings of self-fertilized heterozygous green plants, 854 seedlings were green and 249 were yellow. Theory predicts the ratio of green to yellow is 3:1. Test the hypothesis that 3:1 is the true ratio. Report the P-value, and interpret.

1.9 Table 1.3 contains Ladislaus von BortkiewiczвҖҷs data on deaths of soldiers in the Prussian army from kicks by army mules ЕҪFisher 1934; Quine and Seneta 1987.. The data refer to 10 army corps, each observed for 20 years. In 109 corps-years of exposure, there were no deaths, in 65 corps-years there was one death, and so on. Estimate the mean and test whether probabilities of occurrences in these five categories follow a Poisson distribution ЕҪtruncated for 4 and above..

30

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE 1.3
Number of Deaths
0 1 2 3 4 G5

Data for Problem 1.9
Number of Corps-Years
109 65 22 3 1 0

1.10 A sample of 100 women suffer from dysmenorrhea. A new analgesic is claimed to provide greater relief than a standard one. After using each analgesic in a crossover experiment, 40 reported greater relief with the standard analgesic and 60 reported greater relief with the new one. Analyze these data.
Theory and Methods
1.11 Why is it easier to get a precise estimate of the binomial parameter вҗІ when it is near 0 or 1 than when it is near 21 ?
1.12 Suppose that PЕҪYi s 1. s 1 y PЕҪYi s 0. s вҗІ , i s 1, . . . , n, where Г„Yi4 are independent. Let Y s Гқi Yi. a. What are varЕҪY . and the distribution of Y ? b. When Г„Yi4 instead have pairwise correlation вҗі ) 0, show that varЕҪY . ) nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ., overdispersion relative to the binomial. wAltham ЕҪ1978. discussed generalizations of the binomial that allow correlated trials.x c. Suppose that heterogeneity exists: PЕҪYi s 1<вҗІ . s вҗІ for all i, but вҗІ is a random variable with density function gЕҪРё. on w0, 1x having mean вҗі and positive variance. Show that varЕҪY . ) nвҗіЕҪ1 y вҗі .. ЕҪWhen вҗІ has a beta distribution, Y has the beta-binomial distribution of Section 13.3.. d. Suppose that PЕҪYi s 1<вҗІi. s вҗІi, i s 1, . . . , n, where Г„вҗІi4 are independent from gЕҪРё.. Explain why Y has a binЕҪ n, вҗі . distribution unconditionally but not conditionally on Г„вҗІi4. ЕҪ Hint: In each case, is Y a sum of independent, identical Bernoulli trials?.
1.13 For a sequence of independent Bernoulli trials, Y is the number of successes before the kth failure. Explain why its probability mass

PROBLEMS

31

function is the negatiВ®e binomial,
pЕҪ y . s ЕҪ yy!ЕҪ k y 1. ! вҗІ q k y 1. ! y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . k , y s 0, 1, 2, . . . .
wFor it, EЕҪY . s kвҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ . and varЕҪY . s kвҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ .2, so varЕҪY . ) EЕҪY .; the Poisson is the limit as k в„ў Пұ and вҗІ в„ў 0 with kвҗІ s вҗ® fixed.x

1.14 For the multinomial distribution, show that
corr ЕҪ nj , nk . s yвҗІjвҗІ kr'вҗІj ЕҪ1 y вҗІj .вҗІ k ЕҪ1 y вҗІ k . .
Show that corrЕҪ n1, n2 . s y1 when c s 2. 1.15 Show that the moment generating function ЕҪmgf. for the binomial
distribution is mЕҪt. s ЕҪ1 y вҗІ q вҗІ et.n, and use it to obtain the first two moments. Show that the mgf for the Poisson distribution is mЕҪt. s expЕҪвҗ®wexpЕҪt. y 1x4, and use it to obtain the first two moments.

1.16 A likelihood-ratio statistic equals to. At the ML estimates, show that the data are expЕҪtor2. times more likely under Ha than under H0.
1.17 Assume that y1, y2 , . . . , yn are independent from a Poisson distribution.
a. Obtain the likelihood function. Show that the ML estimator вҗ®ЛҶ s y.
b. Construct a large-sample test statistic for H0: вҗ® s вҗ®0 using (i) the Wald method, (ii) the score method, and (iii) the likelihood-ratio method.
c. Construct a large-sample confidence interval for вҗ® using (i) the Wald method, (ii) the score method, and (iii) the likelihood-ratio method.

1.18 Inference for Poisson parameters can often be based on connections with binomial and multinomial distributions. Show how to test H0: вҗ®1 s вҗ®2 for two populations based on independent Poisson counts ЕҪ y1, y2 ., using a corresponding test about a binomial parameter вҗІ . w Hint: Condition on n s y1 q y2 and identify вҗІ s вҗ®1rЕҪвҗ®1 q вҗ®2 ..x How can one construct a confidence interval for вҗ®1rвҗ®2 based on one for вҗІ ?
1.19 A researcher routinely tests using a nominal PЕҪtype I error. s 0.05, rejecting H0 if the P-value F 0.05. An exact test using test statistic T

32

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

has null distribution PЕҪT s 0. s 0.30, PЕҪT s 1. s 0.62, and PЕҪT s 2.
s 0.08, where a higher T provides more evidence against the null. a. With the usual P-value, show that the actual PЕҪtype I error. s 0. b. With the mid-P-value, show that the actual PЕҪtype I error. s 0.08. c. Find PЕҪtype I error. in parts ЕҪa. and ЕҪb. when PЕҪT s 0. s 0.30,
PЕҪT s 1. s 0.66, PЕҪT s 2. s 0.04. Note that the test with mid-
P-value can be conservative or liberal. The exact test with ordinary
P-value cannot be liberal. d. In part ЕҪa., a randomized-decision test generates a uniform random
variable U from w0, 1x and rejects H0 when T s 2 and U F 85 . Show the actual PЕҪtype I error. s 0.05. Is this a sensible test?

1.20 For a binomial parameter вҗІ , show how the inversion process for constructing a confidence interval works with ЕҪa. the Wald test, and ЕҪb. the score test.

1.21 For a flip of a coin, let вҗІ denote the probability of a head. An
experiment tests H0: вҗІ s 0.5 against Ha: вҗІ / 0.5, using n s 5 independent flips.

a. Show that the true null probability of rejecting H0 at the 0.05

significance

level

is

0.0

for

the

exact

binomial

test

and

1 16

using

the

large-sample score test.

b. Suppose that truly вҗІ s 0.5. Explain why the probability that the 95% ClopperбҺҗPearson confidence interval contains вҗІ equals 1.0. ЕҪ Hint: Is there any possible y for which both one-sided tests of H0: вҗІ s 0.5 have P-value F 0.025?.

1.22 Consider the Wald confidence interval for a binomial parameter вҗІ .
Since it is degenerate when вҗІЛҶ s 0 or 1, argue that for 0 - вҗІ - 1 the
probability the interval covers вҗІ cannot exceed w1 y вҗІ n y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .nx; hence, the infimum of the coverage probability over 0 - вҗІ - 1 equals 0, regardless of n.

1.23 Consider the 95% binomial score confidence interval for вҗІ . When
y s 1, show that the lower limit is approximately 0.18rn; in fact, 0 - вҗІ - 0.18rn then falls in an interval only when y s 0. Argue that for large n and вҗІ just barely below 0.18rn or just barely above 1 y 0.18rn, the actual coverage probability is about ey0.18 s 0.84. Hence, even as n в„ў Пұ, this method is not guaranteed to have coverage probability G 0.95 ЕҪAgresti and Coull 1998; Blyth and Still 1983..

1.24 From Section 1.4.2 the midpoint вҗІЛң of the score confidence interval for
вҗІ is the sample proportion for an adjusted data set that adds zвҗЈ2r2r2

PROBLEMS

33

observations of each type to the sample. This motivates an adjusted Wald interval,

вҗІЛң " zвҗЈr2 'вҗІЛң ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛң . rn* ,

where

n*

s

n

q

2
zвҗЈ r2 .

Show that the variance вҗІЛң ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛң .rn* at the weighted average is at
least as large as the weighted average of the variances that appears under the square root sign in the score interval ЕҪ Hint: Use JensenвҖҷs inequality.. Thus, this interval contains the score interval. wAgresti and Coull ЕҪ1998. and Brown et al. ЕҪ2001. showed that it performs much
better than the Wald interval. It does not have the score intervalвҖҷs disadvantage ЕҪProblem 1.23. of poor coverage near 0 and 1.x

1.25 A binomial sample of size n has y s 0 successes.

a. Show that the confidence interval for вҗІ based on the likelihood function is w0.0, 1 y expЕҪyzвҗЈ2r2r2 n.x. For вҗЈ s 0.05, use the expansion of an exponential function to show that this is approximately
w0, 2rnx.

b. For the score method, show that the confidence interval is

w0,

zвҗЈ2 r2rЕҪ n

q

z

2 вҗЈ

r2

.x,

or

approximately

w0,

4rЕҪ n

q

4.x

when

вҗЈ

s

0.05.

c. For the ClopperбҺҗPearson approach, show that the upper bound is 1 y ЕҪвҗЈr2.1r n, or approximately ylogЕҪ0.025.rn s 3.69rn when вҗЈ

s 0.05.

d. For the adaptation of the ClopperбҺҗPearson approach using the mid-P-value, show that the upper bound is 1 y вҗЈ 1r n, or approximately ylogЕҪ0.05.rn s 3rn when вҗЈ s 0.05.

1.26 For the geometric distribution pЕҪ y. s вҗІ yЕҪ1 y вҗІ ., y s 0, 1, 2, . . . , show that the tail method for constructing a confidence interval wi.e., equating PЕҪY G y. and PЕҪY F y. to вҗЈr2x yields wЕҪвҗЈr2.1r y, ЕҪ1 y вҗЈr2.1rЕҪ yq1. x. Show that all вҗІ between 0 and 1 y вҗЈr2 neВ®er fall above a confidence interval, and hence the actual coverage probability exceeds 1 y вҗЈr2 over this region.

1.27 A statistic T has discrete distribution with cdf FЕҪt.. Show that FЕҪT . is stochastically larger than uniform over w0, 1x; that is, its cdf is everywhere no greater than that of the uniform ЕҪCasella and Berger 2001, pp. 77, 434.. Explain why an implication is that a P-value based on T has null distribution that is stochastically larger than uniform.

1.28 Suppose that PЕҪT s tj. s вҗІj, j s 1, . . . . Show that EЕҪmid-P-value. s 0.5. w Hint: Show that ГқjвҗІ jЕҪвҗІ jr2 q вҗІ jq1 q РёРёРё . s ЕҪГқjвҗІ j.2r2.x

34

INTRODUCTION: DISTRIBUTIONS AND INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

1.29 For a statistic T with cdf FЕҪt. and pЕҪt. s PЕҪT s t., the mid-distribution function is FmidЕҪt. s FЕҪt. y 0.5 pЕҪt. ЕҪParzen 1997.. Given T s to, show that the mid-P-value equals 1 y FЕҪto.. ЕҪIt also satisfies Ew Fmid ЕҪT .x s 0.5 and varw FmidЕҪT .x s ЕҪ1r12.Г„1 y Ew p2ЕҪT .x4..
1.30 Genotypes AA, Aa, and aa occur with probabilities wвҗӘ 2, 2вҗӘ ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ ., ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ .2 x. A multinomial sample of size n has frequencies ЕҪ n1, n2 , n3. of these three genotypes.
a. Form the log likelihood. Show that вҗӘЛҶs ЕҪ2 n1 q n2 .rЕҪ2 n1 q 2 n2 q
2 n3.. b. Show that yСЁ 2 LЕҪвҗӘ .rСЁвҗӘ 2 s wЕҪ2 n1 q n2 .rвҗӘ 2 x q wЕҪ n2 q 2 n3.r
ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ .2 x and that its expectation is 2 nrвҗӘ ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ .. Use this to
obtain an asymptotic standard error of вҗӘЛҶ.
c. Explain how to test whether the probabilities truly have this pattern.

1.31 Refer to Section 1.5.6. Using the likelihood function to obtain the
information, find the approximate standard error of вҗІЛҶ .
1.32 Refer to Section 1.5.6. Let a denote the number of calves that got a primary, secondary, and tertiary infection, b the number that received a primary and secondary but not a tertiary infection, c the number that received a primary but not a secondary infection, and d the number that did not receive a primary infection. Let вҗІ be the probability of a primary infection. Consider the hypothesis that the probability of infection at time t, given infection at times 1, . . . , t y 1, is also вҗІ , for
t s 2, 3. Show that вҗІЛҶ s ЕҪ3a q 2 b q c.rЕҪ3a q 3b q 2 c q d..
1.33 Refer to quadratic form ЕҪ1.16.. a. Verify that the matrix quoted in the text for вҢә0y1 is the inverse of вҢә0. b. Show that ЕҪ1.16. simplifies to PearsonвҖҷs statistic ЕҪ1.15.. c. For the zS statistic ЕҪ1.11., show that zS2 s X 2 for c s 2.
1.34 For testing H0: вҗІj s вҗІj0, j s 1, . . . , c, using sample multinomial pro-
portions Г„вҗІЛҶj4, the likelihood-ratio statistic ЕҪ1.17. is
G2 s y2 n Гқ вҗІЛҶj logЕҪвҗІj0rвҗІЛҶj . .
j

Show that G2 G 0, with equality if and only if вҗІЛҶj s вҗІj0 for all j. ЕҪ Hint: Apply JensenвҖҷs inequality to EЕҪy2 n log X ., where X equals вҗІj0rвҗІЛҶj with probability вҗІЛҶj..

PROBLEMS

35

1.35 The chi-squared mgf with df s вҗҜ is mЕҪt. s ЕҪ1 y 2 t.yвҗҜ r2 , for < t < - 21 . Use it to prove the reproductive property of the chi-squared distribu-
tion.

1.36 For the multinomial ЕҪ n,Г„вҗІj4. distribution with c ) 2, confidence limits for вҗІj are the solutions of
ЕҪвҗІЛҶj y вҗІj .2 s ЕҪ zвҗЈ r2 c . 2вҗІj ЕҪ1 y вҗІj .rn, j s 1, . . . , c.

a. Using the Bonferroni inequality, argue that these c intervals simultaneously contain all Г„вҗІj4 ЕҪfor large samples. with probability at least 1 y вҗЈ.
b. Show that the standard deviation of вҗІЛҶj y вҗІЛҶ k is wвҗІj q вҗІ k y ЕҪвҗІj y
вҗІ k .2 xrn. For large n, explain why the probability is at least 1 y вҗЈ that the Wald confidence intervals
ВҪ 5 ЕҪвҗІЛҶj y вҗІЛҶ k . " zвҗЈ r2 a вҗІЛҶj q вҗІЛҶ k y ЕҪвҗІЛҶj y вҗІЛҶ k .2 rn 1r2
simultaneously contain the a s cЕҪc y 1.r2 differences Г„вҗІj y вҗІ k4 ЕҪsee Fitzpatrick and Scott 1987; Goodman 1965..

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 2
Describing Contingency Tables
In this chapter we introduce tables that display relationships between categorical variables. We also define parameters that summarize their association. Parameters in Section 2.2 are used to compare groups on the proportions of responses in the outcome categories. The odds ratio has special importance, appearing as a parameter in models discussed later. In Section 2.3 we extend the scope by controlling for a third variable. The association can change dramatically under a control. The chapterвҖҷs primary focus is binary variables, which have only two categories, but in Section 2.4 we present parameters for nominal and ordinal multicategory variables. First, in Section 2.1, we introduce basic terminology and notation.
2.1 PROBABILITY STRUCTURE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES
The joint distribution between two categorical variables determines their relationship. This distribution also determines the marginal and conditional distributions.
2.1.1 Contingency Tables and Their Distributions Let X and Y denote two categorical response variables, X with I categories and Y with J categories. Classifications of subjects on both variables have IJ possible combinations. The responses ЕҪ X, Y . of a subject chosen randomly from some population have a probability distribution. A rectangular table having I rows for categories of X and J columns for categories of Y displays this distribution. The cells of the table represent the IJ possible outcomes. When the cells contain frequency counts of outcomes for a sample, the table is called a contingency table, a term introduced by Karl Pearson ЕҪ1904.. Another name is cross-classification table. A contingency table with I rows and J columns is called an I = J ЕҪor I-by-J . table.
36

PROBABILITY STRUCTURE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

37

TABLE 2.1 Cross-Classification of Aspirin Use and Myocardial Infarction

Myocardial Infarction

Fatal Attack

Nonfatal Attack

No Attack

Placebo

18

Aspirin

5

171

10,845

99

10,933

Source: Preliminary report: Findings from the aspirin component of the ongoing PhysiciansвҖҷ Health Study. New Engl. J. Med. 318: 262бҺҗ264 ЕҪ1988..

Table 2.1, a 2 = 3 contingency table, is from a report on the relationship between aspirin use and heart attacks by the PhysiciansвҖҷ Health Study Research Group at Harvard Medical School. The PhysiciansвҖҷ Health Study was a 5-year randomized study of whether regular aspirin intake reduces mortality from cardiovascular disease. Every other day, physicians participating in the study took either one aspirin tablet or a placebo. The study was blindбҺҸthose in the study did not know whether they were taking aspirin or a placebo. Of the 11,034 physicians taking a placebo, 18 suffered fatal heart attacks over the course of the study, whereas of the 11,037 taking aspirin, 5 had fatal heart attacks.
Let вҗІi j denote the probability that ЕҪ X, Y . occurs in the cell in row i and column j. The probability distribution Г„вҗІi j4 is the joint distribution of X and Y. The marginal distributions are the row and column totals that result from summing the joint probabilities. We denote these by Г„вҗІiq4 for the row variable and Г„вҗІqj4 for the column variable, where the subscript вҖҳвҖҳqвҖҷвҖҷ denotes the sum over that index; that is,

вҗІ iqs Гқ вҗІ i j and вҗІqj s Гқ вҗІ i j .

j

i

These satisfy ГқiвҗІiqs ГқjвҗІqj s ГқiГқjвҗІi j s 1.0. The marginal distributions provide single-variable information.
In most contingency tables ЕҪsuch as Table 2.1., one variable, say Y, is a response variable and the other ЕҪ X . is an explanatory variable. When X is
fixed rather than random, the notion of a joint distribution for X and Y is no
longer meaningful. However, for a fixed category of X, Y has a probability
distribution. It is germane to study how this distribution changes as the category of X changes. Given that a subject is classified in row i of X, вҗІj< i denotes the probability of classification in column j of Y, j s 1, . . . , J. Note that ГқjвҗІj<i s 1. The probabilities Г„вҗІ 1<i, . . . , вҗІJ <i4 form the conditional distribution of Y at category i of X. A principal aim of many studies is to compare
conditional distributions of Y at various levels of explanatory variables.

38

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 2.2 Estimated Conditional Distributions for Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Breast Cancer

Diagnosis of Test

Positive

Negative

Total

Yes

0.82

0.18

1.0

No

0.01

0.99

1.0

Source: Data from W. Lawrence et al., J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 90: 1792бҺҗ1800 ЕҪ1998..

2.1.2 Sensitivity and Specificity
The results in Table 2.2 are from a recent article about various methods of attempting to diagnose breast cancer. Based on a literature survey, the authors reported these results for the impact of using mammography together with clinical breast examination. Let X s true disease status ЕҪi.e., whether a woman truly has breast cancer. and let Y s diagnosis ЕҪpositive, negative., where a positive outcome predicts that a woman has breast cancer. The probabilities estimated in Table 2.2 are conditional probabilities of Y given X.
With diagnostic tests for a disease, the two correct diagnoses are a positive test outcome when the subject has the disease and a negative test outcome when a subject does not have it. Given that the subject has the disease, the conditional probability that the diagnostic test is positive is called the sensitiВ®ity; given that the subject does not have the disease, the conditional probability that the test is negative is called the specificity ЕҪYerushalmy 1947.. Ideally, these are both high.
For a 2 = 2 table with the format of Table 2.2, sensitivity is вҗІ 1<1 and specificity is вҗІ 2 <2. In Table 2.2, the estimated sensitivity of combined mammography and clinical examination is 0.82. Of women with breast cancer, 82% are diagnosed correctly. The estimated specificity is 0.99. Of women not having breast cancer, 99% were diagnosed correctly.

2.1.3 Independence of Categorical Variables

When both variables are response variables, descriptions of the association can use their joint distribution, the conditional distribution of Y given X, or the conditional distribution of X given Y. The conditional distribution of Y given X relates to the joint distribution by
вҗІ j<i s вҗІ i jrвҗІ iq for all i and j.

Two categorical response variables are defined to be independent if all joint probabilities equal the product of their marginal probabilities,

вҗІi j s вҗІiqвҗІqj for i s 1, . . . , I and j s 1, . . . , J.

ЕҪ 2 .1.

PROBABILITY STRUCTURE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

39

TABLE 2.3 Notation for Joint, Conditional, and Marginal Probabilities

Column

Row

1

2

Total

1 2
Total

вҗІ 11 ЕҪвҗІ 1<1. вҗІ 21 ЕҪвҗІ 1<2 . вҗІq1

вҗІ 12 ЕҪвҗІ 2 <1. вҗІ 22 ЕҪвҗІ 2 <2 . вҗІq2

вҗІ 1q ЕҪ1.0. вҗІ 2q ЕҪ1.0. 1.0

When X and Y are independent,
вҗІ j< i s вҗІ i jrвҗІ iqs ЕҪ вҗІ iqвҗІqj . rвҗІ iqs вҗІqj

for i s 1, . . . , I.

Each conditional distribution of Y is identical to the marginal distribution of Y. Thus, two variables are independent when Г„вҗІj<1 s РёРёРё s вҗІj< I , for j s 1, . . . , J 4; that is, the probability of any given column response is the same in each row. When Y is a response and X is an explanatory variable, this is a more natural way to define independence than ЕҪ2.1.. Independence is then often referred to as homogeneity of the conditional distributions.
Table 2.3 displays notation for joint, conditional, and marginal distributions for the 2 = 2 case. Sample distributions use similar notation, with p or
вҗІЛҶ in place of вҗІ . For instance, Г„ pi j4 denotes the sample joint distribution. The
cell frequencies are denoted Г„ ni j4, and n s ГқiГқj ni j is the total sample size. Thus,
pi j s ni jrn.

The sample proportion of times that subjects in row i made response j is

pj< i s pi jrpiqs ni jrniq, where niqs npiqs Гқj ni j.

2.1.4 Poisson, Binomial, and Multinomial Sampling

The probability distributions introduced in Section 1.2 extend to cell counts in contingency tables. For instance, a Poisson sampling model treats cell counts Г„Yi j4 as independent Poisson random variables with parameters Г„вҗ®i j4. The joint probability mass function for potential outcomes Г„ni j4 is then the product of the Poisson probabilities PЕҪYi j s ni j. for the IJ cells, or

ЕҒ

ЕҒ

expЕҪyвҗ®i j .

вҗ®

ni ij

jrn

i

j

!

.

ij

40

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

When the total sample size n is fixed but the row and column totals are not, a multinomial sampling model applies. The IJ cells are the possible outcomes. The probability mass function of the cell counts has the multinomial form
n!rЕҪ n11 ! РёРёРё nIJ !. ЕҒ ЕҒ вҗІ ni ji j .
ij

Often, observations on a response Y occur separately at each setting of an
explanatory variable X. This case normally treats row totals as fixed, and for
simplicity, we use the notation ni s niq. Suppose that the ni observations on Y at setting i of X are independent, each with probability distribution Г„вҗІ 1<i, . . . , вҗІJ <i4. The counts Г„ ni j, j s 1, . . . , J 4 satisfying Гқj ni j s ni then have the multinomial form

ni!

n

ЕҒ

вҗІ

j

<

i
i

j

.

ЕҒjnij! j

ЕҪ 2 .2.

When samples at different settings of X are independent, the joint probability function for the entire data set is the product of the multinomial functions ЕҪ2.2. from the various settings. This sampling scheme is independent multinomial sampling, also called product multinomial sampling.
Independent multinomial sampling also results under the following conditions: Suppose that Г„ni j4 result from either independent Poisson sampling with means Г„вҗ®i j4 or multinomial sampling over the IJ cells with probabilities Г„вҗІi j s вҗ®i jrn4. When X is an explanatory variable, it is sensible to perform statistical inference conditional on the totals Г„ni s Гқj ni j4 even when their values are not fixed by the sampling design. Conditional on Г„ni4, the cell counts Г„ni j, j s 1, . . . , J 4 have the multinomial distribution ЕҪ2.2. with response probabilities Г„вҗІj<i s вҗ®i jrвҗ®iq, j s 1, . . . , J 4, and cell counts from different rows are independent. With this conditioning, we treat the row totals as fixed and analyze the data as if they formed separate independent samples.
Sometimes both row and column margins are naturally fixed. The appropriate sampling distribution is then the hypergeometric. In Section 3.5.1 we discuss this case, which is less common.

2.1.5 Seat Belt Example
Researchers in the Massachusetts Highway Department plan to study the relationship between seat-belt use ЕҪyes, no. and outcome of an automobile crash ЕҪfatality, nonfatality. for drivers involved in accidents on the Massachusetts Turnpike. They will summarize results in the format shown in Table 2.4. They plan to catalog all accidents on the turnpike for the next year, classifying each according to these variables. The total sample size is

PROBABILITY STRUCTURE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

41

TABLE 2.4 Seat-Belt Use and Results of Automobile Crashes

Result of Crash

Seat-Belt Use

Fatality

Nonfatality

Yes No

then a random variable. They might treat the numbers of observations at the four combinations of seat-belt use and outcome of crash as independent Poisson random variables with unknown means Г„вҗ®11,вҗ®12 , вҗ®21, вҗ®224.
Suppose, instead, that the researchers randomly sample 200 police records of crashes on the turnpike in the past year and classify each according to seat-belt use and outcome of crash. For this study, the total sample size n is fixed. They might then treat the four cell counts as a multinomial random variable with n s 200 trials and unknown joint probabilities Г„вҗІ 11, вҗІ 12 , вҗІ 21,вҗІ 22 4.
Suppose, instead, that police records for accidents involving fatalities were filed separately from the others. The researchers might instead randomly sample 100 records of accidents with a fatality and randomly sample 100 records of accidents with no fatality. This approach fixes the column totals in Table 2.4 at 100. They might then regard each column of Table 2.4 as an independent binomial sample. Yet another approach, the traditional experimental design, takes 200 subjects and randomly assigns 100 of them to wear seat belts; the 200 then all are forced to have an accident. The recorded results would then be independent binomial samples in each row, with fixed row totals of 100 each. ЕҪObviously, traditional designs common in some experimental science may not be ethical for humans. This is especially true in medical studies..
2.1.6 Types of Studies
Table 2.5 comes from one of the first studies of the link between lung cancer and smoking, by Richard Doll and A. Bradford Hill. In 20 hospitals in London, England, patients admitted with lung cancer in the preceding year were queried about their smoking behavior. For each of the 709 patients admitted, researchers studied the smoking behavior of a noncancer patient at the same hospital of the same gender and within the same 5-year grouping on age. The 709 cases in the first column of Table 2.5 are those having lung cancer and the 709 controls in the second column are those not having it. A smoker was defined as a person who had smoked at least one cigarette a day for at least a year.
Normally, whether lung cancer occurs is a response variable and smoking behavior is an explanatory variable. In this study, however, the marginal

42

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 2.5 Cross-Classification of Smoking by Lung Cancer

Smoker

Lung Cancer

Cases

Controls

Yes No
Total

688

650

21

59

709

709

Source: Based on data reported in Table IV, R. Doll and A. B. Hill, British Med. J., Sept. 30, 1950, pp. 739бҺҗ748.

distribution of lung cancer is fixed by the sampling design, and the outcome measured is whether the subject ever was a smoker. The study, which uses a retrospectiВ®e design to вҖҳвҖҳlook into the past,вҖҷвҖҷ is called a caseбҺҗcontrol study. Such studies are common in health-related applications. Often, the two samples are matched, as in this study. Sometimes the samples of cases and controls are independent rather than matched. For instance, another early caseбҺҗcontrol study on lung cancer and smoking sampled subjects by sending letters to the estates of physicians who had died of some type of cancer in 1950 or 1951, and observations were cross-classified on type of cancer and the subjectвҖҷs smoking behavior ЕҪsee, e.g., Cornfield 1956..
One might want to compare smokers with nonsmokers in terms of the proportion who suffered lung cancer. These proportions refer to the conditional distribution of lung cancer, given smoking behavior. Instead, caseбҺҗcontrol studies provide proportions in the reverse direction, for the conditional distribution of smoking behavior, given lung cancer status. For those in Table 2.5 with lung cancer, the proportion who were smokers was 688r709 s 0.970, while it was 650r709 s 0.917 for the controls.
When we know the proportion of the population having lung cancer, we can use BayesвҖҷ theorem to compute sample conditional distributions in the direction of main interest ЕҪProblem 2.21.. Otherwise, using a retrospective sample, we cannot estimate the probability of lung cancer at each category of smoking behavior. For Table 2.5 we do not know the population prevalence of lung cancer, and the patients suffering it were probably sampled at a rate far in excess of their occurrence in the general population.
By contrast, imagine a study that samples subjects from the population of teenagers and then 60 years later measures the rates of lung cancer for the smokers and nonsmokers. Such a sampling design is prospectiВ®e. There are two types of prospective studies. Clinical trials randomly allocate subjects to the groups who will be smokers and nonsmokers. In cohort studies, subjects make their own choice about whether to smoke, and the study observes in future time who develops lung cancer. Yet another approach, a cross-sectional design, samples subjects and classifies them simultaneously on both variables.

COMPARING TWO PROPORTIONS

43

ProspectiВ®e studies usually condition on the totals Г„ni s Гқj ni j4 for categories of X and regard each row of J counts as an independent multinomial sample on Y. RetrospectiВ®e studies usually treat the totals Г„nqj4 for Y as fixed and regard each column of I counts as a multinomial sample on X. In cross-sectional studies, the total sample size is fixed but not the row or column totals, and the IJ cell counts are a multinomial sample.
CaseбҺҗcontrol, cohort, and cross-sectional studies are called obserВ®ational studies. They simply observe who chooses each group and who has the outcome of interest. By contrast, a clinical trial is an experimental study, the investigator having the advantage of experimental control over which subjects receive each treatment. Such studies can use the power of randomization to make the groups balance roughly on other variables that may be associated with the response. Observational studies are common but have more potential for biases of various types.

2.2 COMPARING TWO PROPORTIONS
Many studies are designed to compare groups on a binary response variable. Then Y has only two categories, such as ЕҪsuccess, failure. for outcome of a medical treatment. With two groups, a 2 = 2 contingency table displays the results. The rows are the groups and the columns are the categories of Y. This section presents parameters for comparing the groups.
2.2.1 Difference of Proportions
For subjects in row i, вҗІ 1<i is the probability that the response has outcome in category 1 ЕҪвҖҳвҖҳsuccessвҖҷвҖҷ.. With only two possible outcomes, вҗІ 2 <i s 1 y вҗІ 1<i, and we use the simpler notation вҗІi for вҗІ 1<i. The difference of proportions of successes, вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 , is a basic comparison of the two rows. Comparison on failures is equivalent to comparison on successes, since
ЕҪ1 y вҗІ1. y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ2. s вҗІ2 y вҗІ1.
The difference of proportions falls between y1.0 and q1.0. It equals zero when the rows have identical conditional distributions. The response Y is statistically independent of the row classification when вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s 0.
When both variables are responses, conditional distributions apply in either direction. One can also compare the two columns, such as by the difference between the proportions in row 1. This usually is not equal to the difference вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 comparing the rows.
2.2.2 Relative Risk
A value вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 of fixed size may have greater importance when both вҗІi are close to 0 or 1 than when they are not. For a study comparing two

44

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

treatments on the proportion of subjects who die, the difference between 0.010 and 0.001 may be more noteworthy than the difference between 0.410 and 0.401, even though both are 0.009. In such cases, the ratio of proportions is also informative.
The relatiВ®e risk is defined to be the ratio

вҗІ 1rвҗІ 2 .

ЕҪ 2 .3.

It can be any nonnegative real number. A relative risk of 1.0 corresponds to independence. For the proportions just given, the relative risks are 0.010r0.001 s 10.0 and 0.410r0.401 s 1.02. Comparing the rows on the second response category gives a different relative risk, ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1.rЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 ..

2.2.3 Odds Ratio For a probability вҗІ of success, the odds are defined to be
вҚҖ s вҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ . .

The odds are nonnegative, with вҚҖ ) 1.0 when a success is more likely than a failure. When вҗІ s 0.75, for instance, then вҚҖ s 0.75r0.25 s 3.0; a success is three times as likely as a failure, and we expect about three successes for every one failure. When вҚҖ s 31 , a failure is three times as likely as a success. Inversely,
вҗІ s вҚҖrЕҪ вҚҖ q 1. .

For instance, when вҚҖ s 31 , then вҗІ s 0.25. Refer again to a 2 = 2 table. Within row i, the odds of success instead of
failure are вҚҖ i s вҗІirЕҪ1 y вҗІi.. The ratio of the odds вҚҖ1 and вҚҖ2 in the two
rows,

вҚҖ1 вҗІ 1rЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1. вҗӘ s вҚҖ2 s вҗІ 2rЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 .

ЕҪ 2 .4.

is called the odds ratio. For joint distributions with cell probabilities Г„вҗІi j4, the equivalent definition
for the odds in row i is вҚҖ i s вҗІi1rвҗІi2 , i s 1, 2. Then the odds ratio is

вҗӘ вҗІ s 11rвҗІ 12 вҗІ s 11вҗІ 22 . вҗІ 21rвҗІ 22 вҗІ 12вҗІ 21

ЕҪ 2 .5.

An alternative name for вҗӘ is the cross-product ratio, since it equals the ratio of the products вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 and вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 of probabilities from diagonally opposite cells ЕҪYule 1900, 1912..

COMPARING TWO PROPORTIONS

45

2.2.4 Properties of the Odds Ratio

The odds ratio can equal any nonnegative number. The condition вҚҖ1 s вҚҖ2 and hence ЕҪwhen all cell probabilities are positive. вҗӘ s 1 corresponds to independence of X and Y. When 1 - вҗӘ - Пұ, subjects in row 1 are more likely to have a success than are subjects in row 2; that is, вҗІ 1 ) вҗІ 2. For instance, when вҗӘ s 4, the odds of success in row 1 are four times the odds in row 2. This does not mean that the probability вҗІ 1 s 4вҗІ 2; that is the interpretation of a relatiВ®e risk of 4.0. When 0 - вҗӘ - 1, вҗІ 1 - вҗІ 2. When one cell has zero probability, вҗӘ equals 0 or Пұ.
Values of вҗӘ farther from 1.0 in a given direction represent stronger
association. Two values represent the same association, but in opposite directions, when one is the inverse of the other. For instance, when вҗӘ s 0.25,
the odds of success in row 1 are 0.25 times the odds in row 2, or equivalently,
the odds of success in row 2 are 1r0.25 s 4.0 times the odds in row 1. When
the order of the rows is reversed or the order of the columns is reversed, the new value for вҗӘ is the inverse of the original value.
For inference, we shall see it is convenient to use log вҗӘ. Independence corresponds to log вҗӘ s 0. The log odds ratio is symmetric about this valueбҺҸ
reversal of rows or of columns results in a change in its sign. Two values for log вҗӘ that are the same except for sign, such as log 4 s 1.39 and log 0.25 s
y1.39, represent the same strength of association.
The odds ratio does not change value when the orientation of the table
reverses so that the rows become the columns and the columns become the rows. This is clear from the symmetric form of ЕҪ2.5.. It is unnecessary to identify one classification as the response variable in order to use вҗӘ. In fact, although ЕҪ2.4. defined it in terms of odds using вҗІi s PЕҪY s 1 < X s i., one could just as well define it using reverse conditional probabilities. With a
joint distribution, conditional distributions exist in each direction, and

вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s 1. rP ЕҪ Y s 2 < X s 1. вҗӘ s вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 s P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s 2. rP ЕҪ Y s 2 < X s 2.
P ЕҪ X s 1 < Y s 1. rP ЕҪ X s 2 < Y s 1. s P ЕҪ X s 1 < Y s 2. rP ЕҪ X s 2 < Y s 2. .

ЕҪ 2 .6.

In fact, the odds ratio is equally valid for prospective, retrospective, or cross-sectional sampling designs. The sample odds ratio estimates the same parameter in each case.
For cell counts Г„ni j4, the sample odds ratio is
вҗӘЛҶs n11 n22rn12 n21 .

This does not change when both cell counts within any row are multiplied by a nonzero constant or when both cell counts within any column are multiplied by a nonzero constant. An implication is that the sample odds ratio

46

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

estimates the same characteristic ЕҪвҗӘ . even when the sample is disproportionately large or small from marginal categories of a variable. For a retrospective study of the association between vaccination and catching a certain strain of flu, the sample odds ratio estimates the same characteristic with a random sample of ЕҪ1. 100 people who got the flu and 100 people who did not, or ЕҪ2. 40 people who got the flu and 160 people who did not. The sample versions of the difference of proportions and relative risk ЕҪ2.3. are invariant to multiplication of counts within rows by a constant, but they change with multiplication within columns or with rowбҺҗcolumn interchange.

2.2.5 Aspirin and Heart Attacks Revisited
We illustrate the three association measures with Table 2.1 on aspirin use and heart attacks. The table differentiates between fatal and nonfatal heart attacks, but we combine these outcomes for now. Of the 11,034 physicians taking placebo, 189 suffered heart attacks, a proportion of 189r11,034 s 0.0171. Of the 11,037 taking aspirin, 104 had heart attacks, a proportion of 0.0094. The sample difference of proportions is 0.0171 y 0.0094 s 0.0077. The relative risk is 0.0171r0.0094 s 1.82. The proportion suffering heart attacks of those taking placebo was 1.82 times the proportion suffering heart attacks of those taking aspirin. The sample odds ratio is ЕҪ189 = 10,933.r ЕҪ10,845 = 104. s 1.83. The odds of heart attack for those taking placebo was 1.83 times the odds for those taking aspirin.

2.2.6 CaseвҖ“Control Studies and the Odds Ratio
With retrospective sampling designs, such as caseбҺҗcontrol studies, it is possible to estimate conditional probabilities of form PЕҪ X s i < Y s j.. It is usually not possible to estimate the probability PЕҪY s j < X s i. of an outcome of interest or the difference of proportions or relative risk for that outcome. It is possible to estimate the odds ratio, however, since by ЕҪ2.6. it is determined by conditional probabilities in either direction.
To illustrate, we revisit Table 2.5 on X s smoking behavior and Y s lung cancer. The data were two binomial samples on X at fixed levels of Y. Thus, we can estimate the probability a subject was a smoker, given the outcome on whether the subject had lung cancer; this was 688r709 for the cases and 650r709 for the controls. We cannot estimate the probability of lung cancer, given whether one smoked, which is more relevant. Thus, we cannot estimate differences or ratios of probabilities of lung cancer. The difference of proportions and relative risk are limited to comparisons of the probabilities of being a smoker. However, we can compute the odds ratio using the sample analog of ЕҪ2.6.,
ЕҪ688r709. rЕҪ21r709. 688 = 59 ЕҪ650r709. rЕҪ59r709. s 650 = 21 s 3.0.

PARTIAL ASSOCIATION IN STRATIFIED 2 = 2 TABLES

47

Moreover, by ЕҪ2.6., interpretations can use the direction of interest, even though the study was retrospective: The estimated odds of lung cancer for smokers were 3.0 times the estimated odds for nonsmokers.

2.2.7 Relationship between Odds Ratio and Relative Risk
From definitions ЕҪ2.3. and ЕҪ2.4.,
Еҫ / 1 y вҗІ2
odds ratio s relative risk 1 y вҗІ 1 .
Their magnitudes are similar whenever the probability вҗІi of the outcome of interest is close to zero for both groups. We saw this similarity in Section 2.2.5 for the aspirin study, where the heart attack proportion was less than 0.02 for each group. The relative risk was 1.82 and the odds ratio was 1.83.
Because of this similarity, when each вҗІi is small, the odds ratio provides a rough indication of the relative risk when it is not directly estimable, such as in caseбҺҗcontrol studies ЕҪCornfield 1951.. For instance, for Table 2.5, if the probability of lung cancer is small regardless of smoking behavior, 3.0 is also a rough estimate of the relative risk; that is, smokers had about 3.0 times the relative frequency of lung cancer as nonsmokers.

2.3 PARTIAL ASSOCIATION IN STRATIFIED 2 = 2 TABLES
An important part of most studies, especially observational studies, is the choice of control variables. In studying the effect of X on Y, one should control any covariate that can influence that relationship. This involves using some mechanism to hold the covariate constant. Otherwise, an observed effect of X on Y may actually reflect effects of that covariate on both X and Y. The relationship between X and Y then shows confounding. Experimental studies can remove effects of confounding covariates by randomly assigning subjects to different levels of X, but this is not possible with observational studies.
Suppose that a study considers effects of passive smoking, the effects on a nonsmoker of living with a smoker. To analyze whether passive smoking is associated with lung cancer, a cross-sectional study might compare lung cancer rates between nonsmokers whose spouses smoke and nonsmokers whose spouses do not smoke. The study should attempt to control for age, socioeconomic status, or other factors that might relate both to spouse smoking and to developing lung cancer. Otherwise, results will have limited usefulness. Spouses of nonsmokers may tend to be younger than spouses of smokers, and younger people are less likely to have lung cancer. Then a lower proportion of lung cancer cases among spouses of nonsmokers may merely reflect their lower average age.

48

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

In this section we discuss the analysis of the association between categorical variables X and Y while controlling for a possibly confounding variable Z. For simplicity, the examples refer to a single control variable. In later chapters we treat more general cases and discuss the use of models to perform statistical control.

2.3.1 Partial Tables
We control for Z by studying the XY relationship at fixed levels of Z. Two-way cross-sectional slices of the three-way contingency table cross classify X and Y at separate categories of Z. These cross sections are called partial tables. They display the XY relationship while removing the effect of Z by holding its value constant.
The two-way contingency table obtained by combining the partial tables is called the XY marginal table. Each cell count in the marginal table is a sum of counts from the same location in the partial tables. The marginal table, rather than controlling Z, ignores it. The marginal table contains no information about Z. It is simply a two-way table relating X and Y but may reflect the effects of Z on X and Y.
The associations in partial tables are called conditional associations, because they refer to the effect of X on Y conditional on fixing Z at some level. Conditional associations in partial tables can be quite different from associations in marginal tables. In fact, it can be misleading to analyze only marginal tables of a multiway contingency table. The following example illustrates.

2.3.2 Death Penalty Example
Table 2.6 is a 2 = 2 = 2 contingency tableбҺҗtwo rows, two columns, and two layersбҺҗfrom an article that studied effects of racial characteristics on whether persons convicted of homicide received the death penalty. The 674 subjects classified in Table 2.6 were the defendants in indictments involving cases

TABLE 2.6 Death Penalty Verdict by DefendantвҖҷs Race and VictimsвҖҷ Race

VictimsвҖҷ Race

DefendantвҖҷs Race

Death Penalty

Yes

No

Percent Yes

White Black

White Black White Black

53

414

11.3

11

37

22.9

0

16

0.0

4

139

2.8

Total

White Black

53

430

11.0

15

176

7.9

Source: M. L. Radelet and G. L. Pierce, Florida Law ReВ®. 43: 1бҺҗ34 ЕҪ1991.. Reprinted with permission from the Florida Law ReВ®iew.

PARTIAL ASSOCIATION IN STRATIFIED 2 = 2 TABLES

49

FIGURE 2.1 Percent receiving death penalty.
with multiple murders in Florida between 1976 and 1987. The variables in Table 2.6 are Y s death penalty verdict, having the categories ЕҪyes, no., X s race of defendant, and Z s race of victims, each having the categories ЕҪwhite, black.. We study the effect of defendantвҖҷs race on the death penalty verdict, treating victimsвҖҷ race as a control variable. Table 2.6 has a 2 = 2 partial table relating defendantвҖҷs race and the death penalty verdict at each category of victimsвҖҷ race.
For each combination of defendantвҖҷs race and victimsвҖҷ race, Table 2.6 lists and Figure 2.1 displays the percentage of defendants who received the death penalty. These describe the conditional associations. When the victims were white, the death penalty was imposed 22.9% y11.3% s 11.6% more often for black defendants than for white defendants. When the victims were black, the death penalty was imposed 2.8% more often for black defendants than for white defendants. Controlling for victimsвҖҷ race by keeping it fixed, the death penalty was imposed more often on black defendants than on white defendants.
The bottom portion of Table 2.6 displays the marginal table. It results from summing the cell counts in Table 2.6 over the two categories of victimsвҖҷ race, thus combining the two partial tables ЕҪe.g., 11 q 4 s 15.. Overall, 11.0% of white defendants and 7.9% of black defendants received the death penalty. Ignoring victimsвҖҷ race, the death penalty was imposed less often on black defendants than on white defendants. The association reverses direction compared to the partial tables.
Why does the association change so much when we ignore versus control victimsвҖҷ race? This relates to the nature of the association between victimsвҖҷ race and each of the other variables. First, the association between victimsвҖҷ

50

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

FIGURE 2.2 Proportion receiving death penalty by defendantвҖҷs race, controlling and ignoring victimsвҖҷ race.
race and defendantвҖҷs race is extremely strong. The marginal table relating these variables has odds ratio ЕҪ467 = 143.rЕҪ48 = 16. s 87.0. Second, Table 2.6 shows that, regardless of defendantвҖҷs race, the death penalty was much more likely when the victims were white than when the victims were black. So whites are tending to kill whites, and killing whites is more likely to result in the death penalty. This suggests that the marginal association should show a greater tendency than the conditional associations for white defendants to receive the death penalty. In fact, Table 2.6 has this pattern.
Figure 2.2 illustrates why the marginal association differs so from the conditional associations. For each defendantвҖҷs race, the figure plots the proportion receiving the death penalty at each category of victimsвҖҷ race. Each proportion is labeled by a letter symbol giving the category of victimsвҖҷ race. Surrounding each observation is a circle having area proportional to the number of observations at that combination of defendantвҖҷs race and victimsвҖҷ race. For instance, the W in the largest circle represents a proportion of 0.113 receiving the death penalty for cases with white defendants and white victims. That circle is largest because the number of cases at that combination ЕҪ53 q 414 s 467. is largest. The next-largest circle relates to cases in which blacks kill blacks.
We control for victimsвҖҷ race by comparing circles having the same victimsвҖҷ race letter at their centers. The line connecting the two W circles has a positive slope, as does the line connecting the two B circles. Controlling for victimsвҖҷ race, this reflects the death penalty being more likely for black defendants than for white defendants. When we add results across victimsвҖҷ

PARTIAL ASSOCIATION IN STRATIFIED 2 = 2 TABLES

51

race to get a summary result for the marginal effect of defendantвҖҷs race on the death penalty verdict, the larger circles, having the greater number of cases, have greater influence. Thus, the summary proportions for each defendantвҖҷs race, marked on the figure by periods, fall closer to the center of the larger circles than to the center of the smaller circles. A line connecting the summary marginal proportions has negative slope, indicating that overall the death penalty was more likely for white defendants than for black defendants.
The result that a marginal association can have a different direction from each conditional association is called SimpsonвҖҷs paradox ЕҪSimpson 1951, Yule 1903.. It applies to quantitative as well as categorical variables. Statisticians commonly use it to caution against imputing causal effects from an association of X with Y. For instance, when doctors started to observe strong odds ratios between smoking and lung cancer, statisticians such as R. A. Fisher warned that some variable ЕҪe.g., a genetic factor. could exist such that the association would disappear under the relevant control. However, other statisticians ЕҪsuch as J. Cornfield. showed that with a very strong XY association, a very strong association must exist between the confounding variable Z and both X and Y in order for the effect to disappear or change under the control ЕҪBreslow and Day 1980, Sec. 3.4..

2.3.3 Conditional and Marginal Odds Ratios
Odds ratios can describe marginal and conditional associations. We illustrate for 2 = 2 = K tables, where K denotes the number of categories of a control variable, Z. Let Г„вҗ®i jk4 denote cell expected frequencies for some sampling model, such as binomial, multinomial, or Poisson sampling.
Within a fixed category k of Z, the odds ratio

вҗӘ X Y ЕҪ k . s вҗ®11 k вҗ®22 k вҗ®12 k вҗ®21 k

ЕҪ 2 .7.

describes conditional XY association in partial table k. The odds ratios for the K partial tables are called XY conditional odds ratios. These can be quite different from marginal odds ratios. The XY marginal table has expected frequencies Г„вҗ®i jqs Гқk вҗ®i jk4. The XY marginal odds ratio is
вҗӘ X Y s вҗ®11q вҗ®22q . вҗ®12q вҗ®21q
Sample values of вҗӘX YЕҪk. and вҗӘX Y use similar formulas with cell counts substituted for expected frequencies. We illustrate for the association between defendantвҖҷs race and the death penalty in Table 2.6. In the first partial

52

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

table, victimsвҖҷ race is white and

вҗӘЛҶX YЕҪ1. s s 53 = 37 0.43.
414 = 11

The sample odds for white defendants receiving the death penalty were 43% of the sample odds for black defendants. In the second partial table, victimsвҖҷ
race is black and the estimated odds ratio equals вҗӘЛҶX YЕҪ2. s ЕҪ0 = 139.ЕҪ16 = 4.
s 0.0, since the death penalty was never given to white defendants with black victims.
Estimation of the marginal odds ratio uses the 2 = 2 marginal table within Table 2.6, collapsing over victimsвҖҷ race, or ЕҪ53 = 176.rЕҪ430 = 15. s 1.45. The sample odds of the death penalty were 45% higher for white defendants than for black defendants. Yet within each victimsвҖҷ race category, those odds were smaller for white defendants. This reversal in the association after controlling for victimsвҖҷ race illustrates SimpsonвҖҷs paradox.

2.3.4 Marginal versus Conditional Independence
More generally, X may have I categories and Y may have J categories. An I = J = K table describes the relationship between X and Y, controlling for Z. If X and Y are independent in partial table k, then X and Y are called conditionally independent at leВ®el k of Z. When Y is a response, this means that
P ЕҪ Y s j < X s i, Z s k . s P ЕҪ Y s j < Z s k . , for all i, j. ЕҪ2.8.

More generally, X and Y are said to be conditionally independent giВ®en Z when they are conditionally independent at every level of Z, that is, when ЕҪ2.8. holds for all k. Then, given Z, Y does not depend on X.
Suppose that a single multinomial applies to the entire three-way table, with joint probabilities Г„вҗІi jk s PЕҪ X s i, Y s j, Z s k.4. Then
вҗІijk s PЕҪ X s i, Z s k. PЕҪ Y s j < X s i, Z s k. ,

which under conditional independence of X and Y, given Z, equals
s вҗІiqk P ЕҪ Y s j < Z s k . s вҗІiqk P ЕҪ Y s j, Z s k . rP ЕҪ Z s k . .

Thus, conditional independence is then equivalent to вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqk вҗІqj krвҗІqqk for all i , j, and k.

ЕҪ 2 .9.

PARTIAL ASSOCIATION IN STRATIFIED 2 = 2 TABLES

53

TABLE 2.7 Expected Frequencies Showing That Conditional Independence Does Not Imply Marginal Independence

Response

Clinic

Treatment

Success

Failure

1

A

18

12

B

12

8

2

A

2

8

B

8

32

Total

A

B

20

20

20

40

Conditional independence does not imply marginal independence ЕҪYule 1903.. For instance, summing ЕҪ2.9. over k on both sides yields
вҗІ i jqs Гқ ЕҪвҗІ iqk вҗІqj krвҗІqqk . .
k

All three terms in the summation involve k, and this does not simplify to вҗІ i jqs вҗІ iqqвҗІqjq, marginal independence.
For 2 = 2 = K tables, X and Y are conditionally independent when the
odds ratio between X and Y equals 1 at each category of Z. The expected frequencies Г„вҗ®i jk4 in Table 2.7 illustrate this relation for Y s response ЕҪsuccess, failure., X s drug treatment ЕҪA, B., and Z s clinic ЕҪ1, 2.. From ЕҪ2.7., the conditional XY odds ratios are

18 = 8 вҗӘX YЕҪ1. s 12 = 12 s 1.0,

2 = 32 вҗӘX YЕҪ2. s 8 = 8 s 1.0.

Given the clinic, response and treatment are conditionally independent. The marginal table combines the tables for the two clinics. Its odds ratio is вҗӘX Y s ЕҪ20 = 40.rЕҪ20 = 20. s 2.0, so the variables are not marginally independent.
Ignoring the clinic, why are the odds of a success for treatment A twice those for treatment B? The conditional XZ and YZ odds ratios give a clue. The odds ratio between Z and either X or Y, at each fixed category of the other variable, equals 6.0. For instance, the XZ odds ratio at the first category of Y equals ЕҪ18 = 8.rЕҪ12 = 2. s 6.0. The conditional odds ЕҪgiven response. of receiving treatment A at clinic 1 are six times those at clinic 2, and the conditional odds ЕҪgiven treatment. of success at clinic 1 are six times those at clinic 2. Clinic 1 tends to use treatment A more often, and clinic 1 also tends to have more successes. For instance, if patients at clinic 1 tended to be younger and in better health than those at clinic 2, perhaps they had a better success rate regardless of the treatment received.

54

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

It is misleading to study only the marginal table, concluding that successes are more likely with treatment A. Subjects within a particular clinic are likely to be more homogeneous than the overall sample, and response is independent of treatment in each clinic.

2.3.5 Homogeneous Association A 2 = 2 = K table has homogeneous XY association when
вҗӘ X Y ЕҪ1. s вҗӘ X Y ЕҪ2. s РёРёРё s вҗӘ X Y ЕҪ K . .

Then the effect of X on Y is the same at each category of Z. Conditional

independence of X and Y is the special case in which each вҗӘX YЕҪk. s 1.0.

Under homogeneous XY association, homogeneity also holds for the other

associations. For instance, the conditional odds ratio between two categories

of X and two categories of Z is identical at each category of Y. For the odds

ratio, homogeneous association is a symmetric property. It applies to any pair

of variables viewed across the categories of the third. When it occurs, there is

said to be no interaction between two variables in their effects on the other

variable.

When interaction exists, the conditional odds ratio for any pair of variables changes across categories of the third. For X s smoking ЕҪyes, no., Y s lung cancer ЕҪyes, no., and Z s age ЕҪ- 45, 45бҺҗ65, ) 65., suppose that

вҗӘX YЕҪ1. s 1.2, вҗӘX YЕҪ2. s 3.9, and вҗӘX YЕҪ3. s 8.8. Then smoking has a weak effect

on lung cancer for young people, but the effect strengthens considerably with

age. Age is called an effect modifier; the effect of smoking is modified

depending on its value.
For the death penalty data ЕҪTable 2.6., вҗӘЛҶX YЕҪ1. s 0.43 and вҗӘЛҶX YЕҪ2. s 0.0.

The values are not close, but the second estimate is unstable because of the

zero cell count. Adding

1 2

to each cell count,

вҗӘЛҶX Y ЕҪ2. s

0.94. Because

вҗӘЛҶX Y ЕҪ2.

is

unstable and because further variation occurs from sampling variability, these

partial tables do not necessarily contradict homogeneous association in a

population. In Section 6.3 we show how to analyze whether sample data are

consistent with homogeneous association or conditional independence.

2.4 EXTENSIONS FOR I = J TABLES
For 2 = 2 tables, a single number such as the odds ratio can summarize the association. For I = J tables, it is rarely possible to summarize association by a single number without some loss of information. However, a set of odds ratios or another summary index can describe certain features of the association.

EXTENSIONS FOR I = J TABLES

55

2.4.1 Odds Ratios in I = J Tables

Еҫ / Odds ratios can use each of the

I 2

s IЕҪ I y 1.r2 pairs

of rows in combina-

Еҫ / tion with each of the

J 2

s JЕҪ J y 1.r2 pairs

of columns.

For

rows

a and

b

and columns c and d, the odds ratio ЕҪвҗІacвҗІ bd.rЕҪвҗІ bcвҗІad. uses four cells in a

Еҫ / Еҫ / rectangular pattern. There are

I 2

J 2

odds ratios of this type. This set of

odds ratios contains much redundant information. Consider the subset of ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. local odds ratios

вҗӘi j s вҗІ i jвҗІ iq1 , jq1 , вҗІ i , jq1вҗІ iq1 , j

i s 1, . . . , I y 1, j s 1, . . . , J y 1. ЕҪ2.10.

Figure 2.3 shows that local odds ratios use cells in adjacent rows and adjacent columns. These ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. odds ratios determine all odds ratios formed from pairs of rows and pairs of columns. To illustrate, in Table 2.1, the sample local odds ratio is 2.08 for the first two columns and 1.74 for the

FIGURE 2.3 Odds ratios for I = J tables.

56

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

second and third columns. In each case, the more serious outcome was more prevalent for the placebo group. The product of these two odds ratios is 3.63, which is the odds ratio for the first and third columns.
Construction ЕҪ2.10. for a minimal set of odds ratios is not unique. Another basic set is

вҗЈi j s вҗІi jвҗІIJ , вҗІIjвҗІi J

i s 1, . . . , I y 1, j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

ЕҪ 2 .11.

This uses the rectangular pattern of cells determined by the cell in row i and column j and the cell in the last row and last column. Figure 2.3 illustrates.
Given the marginal distributions Г„вҗІiq4 and Г„вҗІqj4, when Г„вҗІi j ) 04, conversion of the probabilities into the set of odds ratios ЕҪ2.10. or ЕҪ2.11. does not discard information. The cell probabilities determine the odds ratios, and given the marginals, the odds ratios determine the cell probabilities. In this sense, ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. parameters can describe any association in an I = J table. Independence is equivalent to all ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. odds ratios equaling 1.0.
For three-way I = J = K tables, sets of odds ratios in the partial tables describe the conditional association. Homogeneous XY association means that any conditional odds ratio formed using two categories of X and two categories of Y is the same at each category of Z.

2.4.2 Summary Measures of Association
An alternative way to describe association uses a single summary index. We discuss this first for nominal variables and then ordinal variables. The most interpretable indices for nominal variables have the same structure as Rsquared for interval variables. It and the more general intraclass correlation coefficient and correlation ratio ЕҪKendall and Stuart 1979. describe the proportional reduction in variance from the marginal distribution of the response Y to the conditional distributions of Y given an explanatory variable X.
Let VЕҪY . denote a measure of variation for the marginal distribution Г„вҗІqj4 of Y, and let VЕҪY < i. denote this measure computed for the conditional distribution Г„вҗІ 1<i, . . . , вҗІJ <i4 of Y at the ith setting of X. A proportional reduction in variation measure has the form

VЕҪY. yE VЕҪY < X. VЕҪY. ,

ЕҪ 2 .12.

where EwVЕҪY < X .x is the expectation of the conditional variation taken with respect to the distribution of X. For the marginal distribution Г„вҗІiq4 of X, EwVЕҪY < X .x s ГқiвҗІiqVЕҪY < i..

EXTENSIONS FOR I = J TABLES

57

For a nominal response, Theil ЕҪ1970. proposed an index using the variation measure VЕҪY . s ГқвҗІqj logвҗІqj , called the entropy. For contingency tables, the proportional reduction in entropy equals

ГқiГқjвҗІ i j logЕҪвҗІ i jrвҗІ iqвҗІqj .
U s y ГқjвҗІqj log вҗІqj ,

ЕҪ 2 .13.

called the uncertainty coefficient. This measure is well defined when more than one вҗІqj ) 0. It takes value between 0 and 1: U s 0 is equivalent to independence of X and Y; U s 1 is equivalent to a lack of conditional variation, in the sense that for each i, вҗІj<i s 1 for some j.
Various measures of form ЕҪ2.12. describe association in I = J tables ЕҪe.g., Problems 2.38 and 2.39.. A difficulty with them is developing intuition for how large a value constitutes a strong association. What does it mean, for instance, to say that there is a 30% reduction in entropy? Summary measures seem easier to interpret and more useful when both classifications are ordinal, as discussed next.

2.4.3 Ordinal Trends: Concordant and Discordant Pairs
In Table 2.8 the variables are income and job satisfaction, measured for the black males in a national ЕҪU.S.. sample. Both classifications are ordinal, job satisfaction with the categories very dissatisfied ЕҪVD., little dissatisfied ЕҪLD., moderately satisfied ЕҪMS., and very satisfied ЕҪVS..
When X and Y are ordinal, a monotone trend association is common. As the level of X increases, responses on Y tend to increase toward higher levels, or responses on Y tend to decrease toward lower levels. For instance, perhaps job satisfaction tends to increase as income does. A single parameter can describe this trend. Measures analogous to the correlation describe the degree to which the relationship is monotone. Some measures are based on classifying each pair of subjects as concordant or discordant. A pair is concordant if the subject ranked higher on X also ranks higher on Y. The

TABLE 2.8 Cross-Classification of Job Satisfaction by Income

Job Satisfaction

Income ЕҪdollars.

Very Dissatisfied

Little Dissatisfied

Moderately Satisfied

- 15,000

1

15,000бҺҗ25,000

2

25,000бҺҗ40,000

1

) 40,000

0

3

10

3

10

6

14

1

9

Source: 1996 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

Very Satisfied
6 7 12 11

58

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

pair is discordant if the subject ranking higher on X ranks lower on Y. The pair is tied if the subjects have the same classification on X andror Y.
We illustrate for Table 2.8. Consider a pair of subjects, one in the cell ЕҪ- 15, VD. and the other in the cell ЕҪ15бҺҗ25, LD.. This pair is concordant, since the second subject ranks higher than the first both on income and on job satisfaction. The subject in cell ЕҪ- 15, VD. forms concordant pairs when matched with each of the three subjects classified ЕҪ15бҺҗ25, LD., so these two cells provide 1 = 3 s 3 concordant pairs. The subject in the cell ЕҪ- 15, VD. is also part of a concordant pair when matched with each of the other ЕҪ10 q 7 q 6 q 14 q 12 q 1 q 9 q 11. subjects ranked higher on both variables. Similarly, the three subjects in the ЕҪ- 15, LD. cell are part of concordant pairs when matched with the ЕҪ10 q 7 q 14 q 12 q 9 q 11. subjects ranked higher on both variables.
The total number of concordant pairs, denoted by C, equals
C s 1ЕҪ3 q 10 q 7 q 6 q 14 q 12 q 1 q 9 q 11.
q 3ЕҪ10 q 7 q 14 q 12 q 9 q 11. q 10ЕҪ7 q 12 q 11.
q 2ЕҪ6 q 14 q 12 q 1 q 9 q 11. q 3ЕҪ14 q 12 q 9 q 11.
q10ЕҪ12 q 11. q 1ЕҪ1 q 9 q 11. q 6ЕҪ9 q 11. q 14ЕҪ11. s 1331.

The total number of discordant pairs of observations is
D s 3ЕҪ2 q 1 q 0. q 10ЕҪ2 q 3 q 1 q 6 q 0 q 1. q РёРёРё q12ЕҪ0 q 1 q 9. s 849.

In this example, C ) D, suggesting a tendency for low income to occur with low job satisfaction and high income with high job satisfaction.
Consider two independent observations from a joint probability distribution Г„вҗІi j4. For that pair, the probabilities of concordance and discordance are

Еҫ / вҢёc s 2 Гқ Гқ вҗІi j Гқ Гқ вҗІ hk ,

ij

h)i k)j

Еҫ / вҢёd s 2 Гқ Гқ вҗІi j Гқ Гқ вҗІ hk .

ij

h)i k-j

Here i and j are fixed in the inner summations, and the factor of 2 occurs because the first observation could be in cell ЕҪi, j. and the second in cell ЕҪ h, k., or vice versa. Several association measures for ordinal variables utilize the difference вҢё c y вҢё d.

2.4.4 Ordinal Measure of Association: Gamma Given that a pair is untied on both variables, вҢё crЕҪвҢё c q вҢё d. is the probability of concordance and вҢё drЕҪвҢё c q вҢё d. is the probability of discordance. The

NOTES

59

difference between these probabilities is

вҗҘ вҢё s c y вҢё d , вҢёc q вҢёd

ЕҪ 2 .14.

called gamma ЕҪGoodman and Kruskal 1954.. The sample version is вҗҘЛҶ s ЕҪC y
D.rЕҪC q D.. Like the correlation, gamma treats the variables symmetricallyбҺҸit is
unnecessary to identify one classification as a response variable. Also like the correlation, gamma has range y1 F вҗҘ F 1. A reversal in the category orderings of one variable causes a change in the sign of вҗҘ . Whereas the absolute
value of the correlation is 1 when the relationship between X and Y is perfectly linear, only monotonicity is required for < вҗҘ < s 1, with вҗҘ s 1 if вҢё d s 0 and вҗҘ s y1 if вҢё c s 0. Independence implies that вҗҘ s 0, but the converse is not true. For instance, a U-shaped joint distribution can have вҢё c s вҢё d and hence вҗҘ s 0.

2.4.5 Gamma for Job Satisfaction Example For Table 2.8, C s 1331 and D s 849. Hence,
вҗҘЛҶ s ЕҪ1331 y 849. rЕҪ1331 q 849. s 0.221.
Only a weak tendency exists for job satisfaction to increase as income increases. Of the untied pairs, the proportion of concordant pairs is 0.221 higher than the proportion of discordant pairs.

NOTES
Section 2.2: Comparing Two Proportions
2.1. Breslow ЕҪ1996. presented an interesting overview of the development of methods for caseбҺҗcontrol studies.
2.2. For 2 = 2 tables, Edwards ЕҪ1963. showed that functions of the odds ratio are the only statistics that are invariant both to rowбҺҗcolumn interchange and to multiplication within rows or within columns by a constant. For I = J tables, Altham ЕҪ1970. gave related results. Yule ЕҪ1912, p. 587. had argued that multiplicative invariance is a desirable property for measures of association, especially when proportions sampled in various marginal categories are arbitrary. Goodman ЕҪ2000. showed five ways of viewing association in a 2 = 2 table and proposed a general measure that includes all five.
Section 2.3: Partial Association in Stratified 2 = 2 Tables
2.3. Paik ЕҪ1985. proposed circle diagrams of type Figure 2.2 to summarize three-way tables. Friendly ЕҪ2000. discussed graphical presentation of categorical data. For more on SimpsonвҖҷs paradox and when it can happen, see Blyth ЕҪ1972., Davis ЕҪ1989., Dong ЕҪ1998.,

60

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

Samuels ЕҪ1993., and Simpson ЕҪ1951.. Good and Mittal ЕҪ1989. extended it to an amalgamation paradox, whereby a marginal measure is greater than the maximum or less than the minimum of the partial table measures.

Section 2.4: Extensions for I = J Tables
Еҫ / Еҫ / 2.4. For continuous variables, samples can be fully ranked ЕҪi.e., no ties occur., so C q D s n2 and вҗҘЛҶ s ЕҪC y D.r n2 . This is KendallвҖҷs tau. Agresti ЕҪ1984, Chaps. 9 and 10. and Kruskal ЕҪ1958. surveyed ordinal measures of association. These also apply when one variable is ordinal and the other is binary. When Y is ordinal and X is nominal with I ) 2, no measure presented in Section 2.4 is very helpful. Ordinal modeling approaches ЕҪSection 7.2. use a parameter for each category of X; comparing parameters compares the ordinal response for pairs of categories of X.

PROBLEMS

Applications

2.1 An article in the New York Times ЕҪFeb. 17, 1999. about the PSA blood

test for detecting prostate cancer stated: вҖҳвҖҳThe test fails to detect

prostate cancer in 1 in 4 men who have the disease ЕҪfalse-negative

results., and as many as two-thirds of the men tested receive false-posi-

tive results.вҖҷвҖҷ Let CЕҪC. denote the event of having ЕҪnot having. prostate

cancer, and let q ЕҪy. denote a positive ЕҪnegative. test result. Which is

true:

PЕҪy < C. s

1 4

or

PЕҪC < y. s

41 ?

PЕҪC < q . s

2 3

or

PЕҪq < C. s

32 ?

Determine the sensitivity and specificity.

2.2 A diagnostic test has sensitivity s specificity s 0.80. Find the odds ratio between true disease status and the diagnostic test result.

2.3 Table 2.9 is based on records of accidents in 1988 compiled by the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles in Florida. Identify the response variable, and find and interpret the difference of proportions, relative risk, and odds ratio. Why are the relative risk and odds ratio approximately equal?

TABLE 2.9 Data for Problem 2.3

Safety Equipment in Use

Fatal

Injury Nonfatal

None Seat belt

1601

162,527

510

412,368

Source: Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.

PROBLEMS

61

2.4 Consider the following two studies reported in the New York Times. a. A British study reported ЕҪDec. 3, 1998. that of smokers who get lung cancer, вҖҳвҖҳ women were 1.7 times more vulnerable than men to get small-cell lung cancer.вҖҷвҖҷ Is 1.7 the odds ratio or the relative risk?
b. A National Cancer Institute study about tamoxifen and breast cancer reported ЕҪApr. 7, 1998. that the women taking the drug were 45% less likely to experience invasive breast cancer then were women taking placebo. Find the relative risk for ЕҪi. those taking the drug compared to those taking placebo, and ЕҪii. those taking placebo compared to those taking the drug.

2.5 A study ЕҪE. G. Krug et al., Internat. J. Epidemiol., 27: 214бҺҗ221, 1998. reported that the number of gun-related deaths per 100,000 people in 1994 was 14.24 in the United States, 4.31 in Canada, 2.65 in Australia, 1.24 in Germany, and 0.41 in England and Wales. Use the relative risk to compare the United States with the other countries. Interpret.

2.6 A newspaper article preceding the 1994 World Cup semifinal match

between Italy and Bulgaria stated that вҖҳвҖҳItaly is favored 10бҺҗ11 to beat

Bulgaria, which is rated at 10бҺҗ3 to reach the final.вҖҷвҖҷ Suppose that this

means

that

the

odds

that

Italy

wins

are

11 10

and

the

odds

that

Bulgaria

wins are 103 . Find the probability that each team wins, and comment.

2.7 In the United States, the estimated annual probability that a woman over the age of 35 dies of lung cancer equals 0.001304 for current smokers and 0.000121 for nonsmokers ЕҪM. Pagano and K. Gauvreau, Principles of Biostatistics, Duxbury Press, Pacific Grove, CA. 1993, p. 134..
a. Find and interpret the difference of proportions and the relative risk. Which measure is more informative for these data? Why?
b. Find and interpret the odds ratio. Explain why the relative risk and odds ratio take similar values.

2.8 For adults who sailed on the Titanic on its fateful voyage, the odds ratio between gender ЕҪfemale, male. and survival ЕҪyes, no. was 11.4. ЕҪFor data, see R. J. M. Dawson, J. Statist. Ed. 3, 1995..
a. What is wrong with the interpretation, вҖҳвҖҳThe probability of survival for females was 11.4 times that for malesвҖҷвҖҷ? Give the correct interpretation. When would the quoted interpretation be approximately correct?
b. The odds of survival for females equaled 2.9. For each gender, find the proportion who survived.

62

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

2.9 In an article about crime in the United States, Newsweek ЕҪJan. 10, 1994. quoted FBI statistics for 1992 stating that of blacks slain, 94% were slain by blacks, and of whites slain, 83% were slain by whites. Let Y s race of victim and X s race of murderer. Which conditional distribution do these statistics refer to, Y < X, or X < Y ? What additional information would you need to estimate the probability that the victim was white given that a murderer was white? Find and interpret the odds ratio.

2.10 A research study estimated that under a certain condition, the probability that a subject would be referred for heart catheterization was 0.906 for whites and 0.847 for blacks.
a. A press release about the study stated that the odds of referral for cardiac catheterization for blacks are 60% of the odds for whites. Explain how they obtained 60% ЕҪmore accurately, 57%..
b. An Associated Press story later described the study and said вҖҳвҖҳDoctors were only 60% as likely to order cardiac catheterization for blacks as for whites.вҖҷвҖҷ Explain what is wrong with this interpretation. Give the correct percentage for this interpretation. ЕҪIn stating results to the general public, it is better to use the relative risk than the odds ratio. It is simpler to understand and less likely to be misinterpreted. For details, see New Engl. J. Med. 341: 279бҺҗ283, 1999..
2.11 A 20-year cohort study of British male physicians ЕҪR. Doll and R. Peto, British Med. J. 2: 1525бҺҗ1536, 1976. noted that the proportion per year who died from lung cancer was 0.00140 for cigarette smokers and 0.00010 for nonsmokers. The proportion who died from coronary heart disease was 0.00669 for smokers and 0.00413 for nonsmokers.
a. Describe the association of smoking with each of lung cancer and heart disease, using the difference of proportions, relative risk, and odds ratio. Interpret.
b. Which response is more strongly related to cigarette smoking, in terms of the reduction in number of deaths that would occur with elimination of cigarettes? Explain.

2.12 Table 2.10 refers to applicants to graduate school at the University of California at Berkeley, for fall 1973. It presents admissions decisions by gender of applicant for the six largest graduate departments. Denote the three variables by A s whether admitted, G s gender, and D s department. Find the sample AG conditional odds ratios and the marginal odds ratio. Interpret, and explain why they give such different indications of the AG association.

PROBLEMS

63

TABLE 2.10 Data for Problem 2.12

Department

Whether Admitted

Male

Female

Yes

No

Yes

No

A

512

313

89

19

B

353

207

17

8

C

120

205

202

391

D

138

279

131

244

E

53

138

94

299

F

22

351

24

317

Total 1198

1493

557

1278

Source: Data from Freedman et al. ЕҪ1978, p.14.. See also P. Bickel et al., Science 187: 398бҺҗ403 ЕҪ1975..

2.13 State three вҖҳвҖҳreal-worldвҖҷвҖҷ variables X, Y, and Z for which you expect a marginal association between X and Y but conditional independence controlling for Z.
2.14 Based on 1987 murder rates in the United States, an Associated Press story reported that the probability that a newborn child has of eventually being a murder victim is 0.0263 for nonwhite males, 0.0049 for white males, 0.0072 for nonwhite females, and 0.0023 for white females. a. Find the conditional odds ratios between race and whether a murder victim, given the gender. Interpret. Do these variables exhibit homogeneous association? b. Half the newborns are of each gender, for each race. Find the marginal odds ratio between race and whether a murder victim.
2.15 At each age level, the death rate is higher in South Carolina than in Maine, but overall, the death rate is higher in Maine. Explain how this could be possible. ЕҪFor data, see H. Wainer, Chance 12: 44, 1999..
2.16 A study of the death penalty for cases in Kentucky between 1976 and 1991 ЕҪT. Keil and G. Vito, Amer. J. Criminal Justice 20: 17бҺҗ36, 1995. indicated that the defendant received the death penalty in 8% of the 391 cases in which a white killed a white, in 2% of the 108 cases in which a black killed a black, in 12% of the 57 cases in which a black killed a white, and in 0% of the 18 cases in which a white killed a black. Form the three-way contingency table, obtain the conditional odds ratios between the defendantвҖҷs race and the death penalty verdict, interpret those associations, study whether SimpsonвҖҷs paradox occurs,

64

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

and explain why the marginal association is so different from the conditional associations.

2.17 An estimated odds ratio for adult females between the presence of squamous cell carcinoma ЕҪyes, no. and smoking behavior ЕҪsmoker, nonsmoker. equals 11.7 when the smoker category has subjects whose smoking level s is 0 - s - 20 cigarettes per day; it is 26.1 for smokers with s G 20 cigarettes per day ЕҪR. C. Brownson et al., Epidemiology 3: 61бҺҗ64, 1992.. Show that the estimated odds ratio between carcinoma ЕҪyes, no. and the smoking levels ЕҪ s G 20, 0 - s - 20. equals 2.2.

2.18 Table 2.11 refers to a retrospective study of lung cancer and tobacco smoking among patients in several English hospitals. The table compares male lung cancer patients with control patients having other diseases, according to the average number of cigarettes smoked daily over a 10-year period preceding the onset of the disease.
a. Find the sample odds of lung cancer at each smoking level and the five odds ratios that pair each level of smoking with no smoking. As smoking increases, is there a trend? Interpret.
b. If the log odds of lung cancer is linearly related to smoking level, the log odds in row i satisfies logЕҪodds i. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ i. Show that this implies that the local odds ratios are identical.
c. Using these data, can you estimate the probability of lung cancer at each level of smoking? Are the estimated odds ratios in part ЕҪa. meaningful? Explain.
d. Show that the disease groups are stochastically ordered with respect to their distributions on smoking of cigarettes ЕҪsee Problem 2.34 and Section 7.3.4.. Interpret.

TABLE 2.11 Data for Problem 2.18

Daily Average Number of Cigarettes

Disease Group

Lung Cancer Patients

Control Patients

None -5 5бҺҗ14 15бҺҗ24 25бҺҗ49
50 q

7

61

55

129

489

570

475

431

293

154

38

12

Source: Reprinted with permission from R. Doll and A. B. Hill, British Med. J. 2: 1271бҺҗ1286 ЕҪ1952..

PROBLEMS

TABLE 2.12 Data for Problem 2.19

WifeвҖҷs Rating of Sexual Fun

HusbandвҖҷs Rating

Never or Occasionally

Fairly Often

Very Often

Never or occasionally

7

Fairly often

2

Very often

1

Almost always

2

7

2

8

3

5

4

8

9

Source: Reprinted with permission from Hout et al. ЕҪ1987..

65
Almost Always
3 7 9 14

2.19 Table 2.12 summarizes responses of 91 married couples in Arizona to a question about how often sex is fun. Find and interpret a measure of association between wifeвҖҷs response and husbandвҖҷs response.
2.20 Table 2.13 is from an early study on the death penalty in Florida. Analyze these data and show that SimpsonвҖҷs paradox occurs.

TABLE 2.13 Data for Problem 2.20

VictimвҖҷs Race

DefendantвҖҷs Race

Death Penalty

Yes

No

White Black

White Black White Black

19

132

11

52

0

9

6

97

Source: Reprinted with permission from M. L. Radelet, Amer. Sociol. ReВ®. 46: 918бҺҗ927 ЕҪ1981.

Theory and Methods
2.21 For a diagnostic test of a certain disease, вҗІ 1 denotes the probability that the diagnosis is positive given that a subject has the disease, and вҗІ 2 denotes the probability that the diagnosis is positive given that a subject does not have it. Let вҗі denote the probability that a subject does have the disease. a. Given that the diagnosis is positive, show that the probability that a subject does have the disease is
вҗІ 1 вҗіr вҗІ 1 вҗі q вҗІ 2 ЕҪ1 y вҗі . .

66

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

b. Suppose that a diagnostic test for HIVq status has both sensitivity and specificity equal to 0.95, and вҗі s 0.005. Find the probability that a subject is truly HIVq , given that the diagnostic test is positive. To better understand this answer, find the joint probabilities relating diagnosis to actual disease status, and discuss their relative sizes.
2.22 Binomial parameters for two groups are graphed, with вҗІ 1 on the horizontal axis and вҗІ 2 on the vertical axis. Plot the locus of points for a 2 = 2 table having ЕҪa. relative risk s 0.5, ЕҪb. odds ratio s 0.5, and ЕҪc. difference of proportions s y0.5.

2.23 Let D denote having a certain disease and E denote having exposure to a certain risk factor. The attributable risk ЕҪAR. is the proportion of disease cases attributable to that exposure ЕҪsee Benichou 1998.. a. Let PЕҪ E. s 1 y PЕҪ E.. Explain why
AR s P ЕҪ D. y P ЕҪ D < E . rP ЕҪ D. .

b. Show that AR relates to the relative risk RR by
AR s P ЕҪ E . ЕҪRR y 1. r 1 q P ЕҪ E . ЕҪRR y 1. .
2.24 For a 2 = 2 table of counts Г„ni j4, show that the odds ratio is invariant to ЕҪa. interchanging rows with columns, and ЕҪb. multiplication of cell counts within rows or within columns by c / 0. Show that the difference of proportions and the relative risk do not have these properties.
2.25 For given вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 , show that the relative risk cannot be farther than the odds ratio from their independence value of 1.0.
2.26 Explain why for three events E1, E2 , and E3 and their complements, it is possible that PЕҪ E1 < E2 . ) PЕҪ E1 < E2 . even if both PЕҪ E1 < E2 E3. PЕҪ E1 < E2 E3. and PЕҪ E1 < E2 E3. - PЕҪ E1 < E2 E3.. ЕҪ Hint: Use SimpsonвҖҷs paradox for a three-way table..
2.27 Let вҗІi j < k s PЕҪ X s i, Y s j < Z s k.. Explain why XY conditional independence is
вҗІ i j< k s вҗІ iq< kвҗІqj < k for all i and j and k.
2.28 For a 2 = 2 = 2 table, show that homogeneous association is a symmetric property, by showing that equal XY conditional odds ratios is equivalent to equal YZ conditional odds ratios.

PROBLEMS

67

2.29 Smith and Jones are baseball players. Smith has a higher batting average than Jones in each of K years. Is is possible that for the combined data from the K years, Jones has the higher batting average? Explain, using an example to illustrate.

2.30 When X and Y are conditionally dependent at each level of Z yet marginally independent, Z is called a suppressor В®ariable. Specify joint probabilities for a 2 = 2 = 2 table to show that this can happen ЕҪa. when there is homogeneous association, and ЕҪb. when the association has opposite direction in the partial tables.

Еҫ / Еҫ / 2.31

Show that the Г„вҗЈi j4 in ЕҪ2.11. determine ЕҪa. all

I 2

J odds ratios
2

formed from pairs of rows and pairs of columns, ЕҪb. all Г„вҗӘi j4 in ЕҪ2.10.,

and vice versa.

2.32 Refer to Problem 2.31. When all rows and columns have positive probability, show that independence is equivalent to all Г„вҗЈi j s 14.
2.33 For I = J contingency tables, explain why the variables are independent when the ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. differences вҗІj<i y вҗІj< I s 0, i s 1, . . . , I y 1, j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

2.34 A 2 = J table has ordinal response. Let Fj<i s вҗІ 1<i q РёРёРё qвҗІj<i. When Fj<2 F Fj<1 for j s 1, . . . , J, the conditional distribution in row 2 is stochastically higher than the one in row 1. Consider the cumulatiВ®e
odds ratios

Fj<1rЕҪ1 y Fj<1 . вҗӘj s Fj<2rЕҪ1 y Fj<2 . ,

j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

a. Show that log вҗӘj G 0 for all j is equivalent to row 2 being stochastically higher than row 1. Explain why row 2 is then more likely than row 1 to have observations at the high end of the ordinal scale.
b. If all local log odds ratios are nonnegative, log вҗӘj G 0 for 1 F j F J y 1 ЕҪLehmann 1966.. Show by counterexample that the converse is not true.
2.35 Suppose that Г„Yi j4 are independent Poisson variates with means Г„вҗ®i j4. Show that PЕҪYi j s ni j. for all i, j, conditional on Г„Yiqs ni4, satisfy independent multinomial sampling wi.e., the product of ЕҪ2.2. for all ix within the rows.

68

DESCRIBING CONTINGENCY TABLES

2.36 For 2 = 2 tables, Yule ЕҪ1900, 1912. introduced

вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 y вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 Q s вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 q вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 ,

which he labeled Q in honor of the Belgian statistician Quetelet. It is now called YuleвҖҷs Q.
a. Show that for 2 = 2 tables, Goodman and KruskalвҖҷs вҗҘ s Q.
b. Show that Q falls between y1 and 1.
c. State conditions under which Q s y1 or Q s 1. d. Show that Q relates to the odds ratio by Q s ЕҪвҗӘ y 1.rЕҪвҗӘ q 1.,
a monotone transformation of вҗӘ from the w0, Пұx scale onto the wy1,q 1x scale.

Еҫ / 2.37 When X and Y are ordinal with counts Г„ni j4:

a. Explain why the

n 2

pairs of observations partition into C q D q

TX q TY y TX Y , where TX s ГқniqЕҪ niqy 1.r2 pairs are tied on X,

TY pairs are tied on Y, and TX Y pairs are tied on X and Y. b. For each ordered pair of observations ЕҪ Xa, Ya. and ЕҪ Xb,Yb., let
Xab s signЕҪ Xa y Xb. and Yab s signЕҪYa y Yb.. Show that the sample correlation for the nЕҪ n y 1. distinct ЕҪ Xab, Yab. pairs is

ВҪ 5 Еҫ / Еҫ / вҗ¶b s

CyD 1r2 .
n2 y TX n2 y TY

This ordinal measure, called KendallвҖҷs tau-b ЕҪKendall 1945., is less

Еҫ / sensitive than gamma to the choice of response categories.

c. Let d s ЕҪC y D.r

n 2

y TX

. Explain why d is the difference be-

tween the proportions of concordant and discordant pairs out of those pairs untied on X ЕҪSomers 1962.. ЕҪFor 2 = 2 tables, d equals

the difference of proportions, and tau-b equals the correlation between X and Y..

2.38 Goodman and Kruskal ЕҪ1954. proposed an association measure ЕҪtau. for nominal variables based on variation measure

V ЕҪ Y . s Гқ вҗІqj ЕҪ1 y вҗІqj . s 1 y Гқ вҗІqj2 .

a. Show VЕҪY . is the probability that two independent observations on Y fall in different categories ЕҪcalled the Gini concentration index..

PROBLEMS

69

Show that VЕҪY . s 0 when вҗІqj s 1 for some j and VЕҪY . takes maximum value of ЕҪ J y 1.rJ when вҗІqj s 1rJ for all j. b. For the proportional reduction in variation, show that EwVЕҪY < X .x s 1 y ГқiГқjвҗІi j2rвҗІiq. wThe resulting measure ЕҪ2.12. is called the concentration coefficient. Like U, вҗ¶ s 0 is equivalent to independence. Haberman ЕҪ1982. presented generalized concentration and uncertainty coefficients.x

2.39 The measure of association lambda for nominal variables ЕҪGoodman and Kruskal 1954. has VЕҪY . s 1 y maxГ„вҗІqj4 and VЕҪY < i. s 1 y max jГ„вҗІj<i4. Interpret lambda as a proportional reduction in prediction error for predictions which select the response category that is most likely. Show that independence implies вҗӯ s 0 but that the converse is
not true.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 3
Inference for Contingency Tables
In this chapter we introduce inferential methods for contingency tables. Many of these methods also play a vital role in analyses of later chapters for which categorical data need not have contingency table form. The methods assume Poisson, multinomial, or independent binomial sampling.
In Section 3.1 we present confidence intervals for measures of association for 2 = 2 tables such as the odds ratio. Section 3.2 covers chi-squared tests of the hypothesis of independence between two categorical variables. Like any significance test, these have limited usefulness. In Section 3.3 we show how to follow-up the test using residuals or the partitioning property of chi-squared to extract components that describe the evidence about the association. In Section 3.4 we present more powerful inference applicable with ordered categories. The methods of Sections 3.1 through 3.4 assume large samples. In Sections 3.5 and 3.6 we introduce small-sample methods.
3.1 CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR ASSOCIATION PARAMETERS The accuracy of estimators of association parameters is characterized by standard errors of their sampling distributions. In this section we present large-sample standard errors and confidence intervals.
3.1.1 Interval Estimation of Odds Ratios
The sample odds ratio вҗӘЛҶs n11 n22rn12 n21 for a 2 = 2 table equals 0 or Пұ if
any ni j s 0, and it is undefined if both entries in a row or column are zero. Since these outcomes have positive probabilities, the expected value and
variance of вҗӘЛҶ and log вҗӘЛҶ do not exist. ЕҪIn fact, this is also true for ML
estimators of model parameters presented in later chapters.. In terms of bias and mean-squared error, Gart and Zweiful ЕҪ1967. and Haldane ЕҪ1956.
70

CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR ASSOCIATION PARAMETERS

71

showed that the amended estimators

вҗӘЛңs ЕҪ n11 q 0.5. ЕҪ n22 q 0.5. ЕҪ n12 q 0.5. ЕҪ n21 q 0.5.

and log вҗӘЛң behave well ЕҪProblem 14.4.. The estimators вҗӘЛҶ and вҗӘЛң have the same asymptotic normal distribution
around вҗӘ. Unless n is quite large, however, their distributions are highly
skewed. When вҗӘ s 1, for instance, вҗӘЛҶ cannot be much smaller than вҗӘ ЕҪsince вҗӘЛҶG 0., but it could be much larger with nonnegligible probability. The log

transform, having an additive rather than multiplicative structure, converges
more rapidly to normality. An estimated standard error for log вҗӘЛҶ is

Еҫ / 1 1 1 1 1r2

вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪlog вҗӘЛҶ. s q q q

.

n11 n12 n21 n22

ЕҪ 3 .1.

We derive this formula in Section 3.1.7.
By the large-sample normality of log вҗӘЛҶ,

log вҗӘЛҶ" zвҗЈr2 вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪlog вҗӘЛҶ.

ЕҪ 3 .2.

is a Wald confidence interval for log вҗӘ. Exponentiating ЕҪtaking antilogs of. its endpoints provides a confidence interval for вҗӘ. Woolf ЕҪ1955. proposed this interval. It works quite well, usually being a bit conservative ЕҪi.e., actual coverage probability higher than the nominal level..
When вҗӘЛҶs 0 or Пұ, WoolfвҖҷs interval does not exist. When вҗӘЛҶs 0, one should take 0 as the lower limit and when вҗӘЛҶs Пұ, one should take Пұ as the upper
limit. The other bound can use the Woolf formula following some adjustment, such as GartвҖҷs ЕҪ1966., which replaces Г„ni j4 by Г„ni j q 0.54 in the estimator and standard error. A less ad hoc approach forms the interval by inverting score tests ЕҪCornfield 1956. or likelihood-ratio tests for вҗӘ , as we
discuss in Section 3.1.8.

3.1.2 Aspirin and Myocardial Infarction Example
We illustrate inference for the odds ratio with Table 3.1 based on a Swedish study of the association between aspirin use and myocardial infarction similar to that described in Section 2.2.5. The study randomly assigned 1360 patients who had already suffered a stroke to an aspirin treatment ЕҪone low-dose tablet a day. or to a placebo treatment. Table 3.1 reports the number of deaths due to myocardial infarction during a follow-up period of about 3 years.
The sample odds ratio вҗӘЛҶs 1.56 is close to вҗӘЛңs 1.55, since no cell count is especially small. The standard error ЕҪ3.1. of logвҗӘЛҶs 0.445 is вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪlogвҗӘЛҶ. s 0.307.

72

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 3.1 Swedish Study on Aspirin Use and Myocardial Infarction

Myocardial Infarction

Yes

No

Total

Placebo

28

656

684

Aspirin

18

658

676

Source: Based on results described in Lancet 338: 1345бҺҗ1349 ЕҪ1991..

A 95% confidence interval for logвҗӘ in the population this sample represents is 0.445 " 1.96ЕҪ0.307., or ЕҪy0.157, 1.047.. The corresponding interval for вҗӘ is wexpЕҪy0.157., expЕҪ1.047.x, or ЕҪ0.85, 2.85.. The estimate of the true odds ratio is rather imprecise.
Since the confidence interval for вҗӘ contains 1.0, it is plausible that the true odds of death due to myocardial infarction are equal for aspirin and placebo. If there truly is a beneficial effect of aspirin but the odds ratio is not large, it may require a large sample size to show that benefit because of the relatively small number of myocardial infarction cases ЕҪProblem 3.21..

3.1.3 Interval Estimation of Difference of Proportions

The difference of proportions and the relative risk compare conditional distributions of a response variable for two groups. For these measures, we treat the samples as independent binomials. For group i, yi has a binomial distribution with sample size ni and a probability вҗІi of a вҖҳвҖҳsuccessвҖҷвҖҷ response.
The sample proportion вҗІЛҶi s yirni has expectation вҗІi and variance вҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi.rni. Since вҗІЛҶ 1 and вҗІЛҶ 2 are independent, their difference has
E ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . s вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2

and standard error

вҗІ 1ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1 . вҗІ 2 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 . 1r2

вҗҙ ЕҪвҗІЛҶ1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . s

q

.

n1

n2

ЕҪ 3 .3.

The estimate вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . uses formula ЕҪ3.3. with вҗІi replaced by вҗІЛҶi. Then

ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . " zвҗЈ r2 вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 .

ЕҪ 3 .4.

is a Wald confidence interval for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2. Like the Wald interval ЕҪ1.13. for a single proportion, it usually has true coverage probability less than the nominal confidence coefficient, especially when вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 are near 0 or 1. More complex but better methods are cited in Section 3.1.8, Note 3.2, and
Problem 3.23.

CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR ASSOCIATION PARAMETERS

73

3.1.4 Interval Estimation of Relative Risk
The sample relative risk is r s вҗІЛҶ 1rвҗІЛҶ 2. Like the odds ratio, it converges to
normality faster on the log scale. The asymptotic standard error of log r is

Еҫ / вҗҙ ЕҪlog r. s

1 y вҗІ 1 1 y вҗІ 2 1r2 вҗІ 1 n1 q вҗІ 2 n2 .

ЕҪ 3 .5.

The Wald interval exponentiates endpoints of log r " zвҗЈr2 вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪlog r .. It works
well but can be somewhat conservative. We discuss an alternative method in Section 3.1.8.
For Table 3.1, the sample proportion of myocardial infarction deaths was 0.0409 for subjects taking placebo and 0.0266 for subjects taking aspirin. The sample relative risk is 0.0409r0.0266 s 1.54. The 95% confidence interval for the log relative risk of logЕҪ1.54. " 1.96ЕҪ0.297. translates to ЕҪ0.86, 2.75. for the relative risk. We infer that the death rate for those taking placebo was between 0.86 and 2.75 times that for those taking aspirin. The Wald 95% confidence interval for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 is 0.014 " 1.96ЕҪ0.0098. or ЕҪy0.005, 0.033.. According to either measure, substantial public health benefits could result from taking aspirin, but no effect or a slight negative effect are also plausible. Results for the larger study described in Section 2.2.5 do show a benefit.

3.1.5 Deriving Standard Errors with the Delta Method*
A simple and useful method exists of deriving standard errors for large-sample inferences. Let Tn denote a statistic that is asymptotically normally distributed about a parameter вҗӘ , the subscript n expressing its dependence on sample size. Suppose that an estimator is a function gЕҪTn. of Tn. Then, under mild conditions, gЕҪTn. itself has a large-sample normal distribution. The standard error depends on how fast gЕҪt. changes for t near вҗӘ.
Specifically, for large n, suppose that Tn is normally distributed about
вҗӘ with standard error вҗҙr'n . That is, as n в„ў Пұ, the cdf of 'n ЕҪTn y вҗӘ .
converges to the cdf of a normal random variable with mean 0 and variance вҗҙ 2. This limiting behavior is an example of conВ®ergence in distribution, denoted by

'n

ЕҪ

Tn

y

вҗӘ

.

d
в„ў

N

ЕҪ

0,

вҗҙ

2

.

.

Let g be a function that is at least twice differentiable at вҗӘ. Using the Taylor series expansion for gЕҪt. in a neighborhood of t s вҗӘ , in Section 14.1.2 we show
'n g ЕҪ Tn . y g ЕҪ вҗӘ . f 'n ЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ . gX ЕҪ вҗӘ .

74

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

FIGURE 3.1 Depiction of delta method.

for large n, where gXЕҪвҗӘ . s СЁ grСЁ t evaluated at t s вҗӘ. Recall if a variate Y ; NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 ., then cY ; NЕҪ0, c2вҗҙ 2 .. Thus,

'n

g ЕҪ Tn . y g ЕҪ вҗӘ .

d
в„ў NЕҪ0,

gXЕҪвҗӘ . 2вҗҙ 2 ..

ЕҪ 3 .6.

In other words, gЕҪTn. is approximately normal around gЕҪвҗӘ . with variance w gXЕҪвҗӘ .x2вҗҙ 2rn.
Figure 3.1 portrays this result. Locally around вҗӘ , gЕҪt. is approximately linear, with slope gXЕҪвҗӘ .. Then gЕҪTn. is approximately normal, since linear transformations of normal random variables are themselves normal. The dispersion of gЕҪTn. values about gЕҪвҗӘ . is about < gXЕҪвҗӘ . < times the dispersion of Tn values about вҗӘ. If the slope of g at вҗӘ is 21 , then g maps a region of Tn values into a region of gЕҪTn. values only about half as wide.
Result ЕҪ3.6. is called the delta method. Since gXЕҪвҗӘ . and вҗҙ 2 s вҗҙ 2ЕҪвҗӘ . usually depend on the unknown parameter вҗӘ , the asymptotic variance is unknown. Confidence intervals and tests substitute Tn for вҗӘ and use the
result that 'n w gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ .xr < gXЕҪTn. < вҗҙ ЕҪTn. is asymptotically standard nor-
mal. For instance,
g ЕҪ Tn . " 1.96 gX ЕҪ Tn . вҗҙ ЕҪ Tn . r'n

is a large-sample Wald 95% confidence interval for gЕҪвҗӘ ..

3.1.6 Delta Method Applied to Sample Logit*
We illustrate the delta method for a function of the ML estimator Tn s вҗІЛҶ s
yrn of the binomial parameter вҗІ , for y successes in n trials. Since EЕҪY . s nвҗІ
and varЕҪY . s nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ., EЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s вҗІ and varЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .rn. Also, вҗІЛҶ

CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR ASSOCIATION PARAMETERS

75

has a large-sample normal distribution by the central limit theorem. So do
many functions of вҗІЛҶ . The log odds function of вҗІЛҶ ,

g ЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s log вҗІЛҶrЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . ,

is called the sample logit. Evaluated at вҗІ , its derivative equals 1rвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ..
By the delta method, the asymptotic variance of the sample logit is
вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .rn ЕҪthe variance of вҗІЛҶ . multiplied by the square of w1rвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .x.
That is

Еҫ / Еҫ / вҗІЛҶ

вҗІ

d

1

'n log

y log

в„ў N 0,

.

1 y вҗІЛҶ

1yвҗІ

вҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .

The asymptotic normality of вҗІЛҶ propagates to asymptotic normality of logwвҗІЛҶrЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ .x.
The asymptotic variance is the variance of the normal distribution that approximates the true distribution, for large n. It is not an approximation for the variance of the true distribution. For 0 - вҗІ - 1, the asymptotic variance w nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .xy1 of the sample logit is finite. By contrast, the true variance
does not exist: Since вҗІЛҶ s 0 or 1 with positive probability, the logit can equal
yПұ or Пұ with positive probability. The probability of an infinite logit converges to zero rapidly as n increases. For large n, the distribution of the sample logit looks essentially normal with mean logwвҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ .x and standard deviation w nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .xy1r2 . Thus, for the logit, the asymptotic variance actually has greater use than the true variance. Incidentally, related to this, the bootstrap is not helpful for approximating standard errors for many discrete measures, because it mimics the true rather than the more relevant asymptotic standard error.

3.1.7 Delta Method for Log Odds Ratio*

Standard errors for the log odds ratio and the log relative risk result from a multiparameter version of the delta method. Suppose that Г„ni, i s 1, . . . , c4
have a multinomial ЕҪ n, Г„вҗІi4. distribution. The sample proportion вҗІЛҶi s nirn
has mean and variance

EЕҪ вҗІЛҶi . s вҗІi and varЕҪ вҗІЛҶi . s вҗІi ЕҪ1 y вҗІi . rn.

ЕҪ 3 .7.

In Section 14.1.4 we show that for i / j, вҗІЛҶi and вҗІЛҶj have covariance
covЕҪвҗІЛҶi , вҗІЛҶj . s yвҗІiвҗІjrn.

ЕҪ 3 .8.

The sample proportions ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1, вҗІЛҶ 2 , . . . , вҗІЛҶcy1 . have a large-sample multivariate
normal distribution. For functions of them, the delta method implies the

76

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

following result, proved in Section 14.1.4:

Let gЕҪ вҗІ. denote a differentiable function of Г„вҗІi4, with sample value gЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . for a
multinomial sample. Let

СЁgЕҪвҗІ.
вҗҫi s СЁвҗІi ,

i s 1, . . . , c.

Then as n в„ў Пұ, the distribution of 'n w gЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y gЕҪ вҗІ.xrвҗҙ converges to standard
normal, where

вҗҙ 2 s Гқ вҗІiвҗҫi2 y ЕҪ Гқ вҗІiвҗҫi .2.

ЕҪ3.9.

The asymptotic variance depends on Г„вҗІi4 and the partial derivatives of the measure with respect to Г„вҗІi4. In practice, replacing Г„вҗІi4 and Г„вҗҫi4 in ЕҪ3.9. by
their sample values yields an ML estimate вҗҙЛҶ 2 of вҗҙ 2. Then вҗҙЛҶr'n is an
estimated standard error for gЕҪ вҗІЛҶ .. A large-sample Wald confidence interval
for gЕҪ вҗІ. is
g ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . " zвҗЈr2 вҗҙЛҶr'n .

With the substitution of вҗҙЛҶ for вҗҙ in ЕҪ3.9., the limiting distribution is still
standard normal, but convergence is slower. The equivalence in the large-
sample distribution is justified as follows: The sample proportions converge
in probability to Г„вҗІi4, by the weak law of large numbers. Since вҗҙЛҶ is a
continuous function of the sample proportions, it converges in probability to
вҗҙ , and вҗҙrвҗҙЛҶ converges in probability to 1. Now

'n s g ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y g ЕҪ вҗІ . 'n g ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . . y g ЕҪ вҗІ . вҗҙ

вҗҙЛҶ

вҗҙ

вҗҙЛҶ

The first term on the right-hand side converges in distribution to standard normal, by ЕҪ3.9., and the second term converges in probability to 1. Thus, their product also has a limiting standard normal distribution.
We now apply the delta method to the log odds ratio, taking gЕҪ вҗІ. s log вҗӘ s log вҗІ 11 q log вҗІ 22 y log вҗІ 12 y log вҗІ 21. Since

вҗҫ11 s СЁ ЕҪlog вҗӘ . rСЁвҗІ 11 s 1rвҗІ 11

вҗҫ12 s y1rвҗІ 12 , вҗҫ21 s y1rвҗІ 21 , вҗҫ22 s 1rвҗІ 22 ,

ГқiГқ jвҗІ i jвҗҫi j s 0 and вҗҙ 2 s ГқiГқ jвҗІ i jвҗҫi j2 s ГқiГқ jЕҪ1rвҗІ i j.. The
dard error of log вҗӘЛҶ for a multinomial sample Г„ni j4 is
Еҫ / вҗҙ ЕҪlog вҗӘЛҶ. s вҗҙr'n s Гқ Гқ 1rnвҗІi j . 1r2 ij

asymptotic

stan-

Since nвҗІЛҶi j s ni j, the estimated standard error is ЕҪ3.1..

CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR ASSOCIATION PARAMETERS

77

The delta method also applies directly with вҗӘ to obtain вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪвҗӘЛҶ. and a Wald confidence interval вҗӘЛҶ" zвҗЈr2 вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪвҗӘЛҶ.. This is not recommended; вҗӘЛҶ converges more slowly than log вҗӘЛҶ to normality, this interval could contain negative
values, and it does not give results equivalent to those obtained with the
Wald interval using 1rвҗӘЛҶ and its standard error.

3.1.8 Score and Profile Likelihood Confidence Intervals*
Standard errors obtained with the delta method appear in Wald confidence intervals. However, intervals based on inverting Wald tests sometimes work poorly for small to moderate n. Alternative intervals result from inverting likelihood-ratio or score tests. Although computationally more complex, these methods often perform better.
We illustrate first with the score method for the difference of proportions. The score test ЕҪMee 1984; Miettinen and Nurminen 1985. of H0: вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s вҢ¬ has the test statistic

zЕҪвҢ¬. s

ЕҪвҗІЛҶ1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . y вҢ¬

'вҗІЛҶ 1ЕҪ вҢ¬. 1 y вҗІЛҶ 1ЕҪ вҢ¬. rn1 q вҗІЛҶ 2 ЕҪ вҢ¬. 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 ЕҪ вҢ¬. rn2

where вҗІЛҶiЕҪвҢ¬. denotes the ML estimate of вҗІi subject to the constraint вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s вҢ¬. That is, вҗІЛҶ 1ЕҪвҢ¬. and вҗІЛҶ 2ЕҪвҢ¬. are the values of вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2
satisfying вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s вҢ¬ that maximize the product of the two binomial probability mass functions. These values do not have closed-form expressions and are determined using numerical methods. The score confidence interval is the set of вҢ¬ such that < zЕҪвҢ¬. < - zвҗЈr2 . Computations for such intervals require iteration ЕҪNurminen 1986..
For the relative risk also, slightly better performance results with an interval using the score method ЕҪBedrick 1987; Gart and Nam 1988; Koopman 1984, Miettinen and Nurminen 1985; Nurminen 1986.. Cornfield ЕҪ1956. and Miettinen and Nurminen ЕҪ1985. showed the score interval for the odds ratio. We prefer not to use a continuity or finite-sampling correction with these intervals, as then performance is too conservative. The fact that the score intervals are computationally more complex than Wald intervals should not be an impediment to their use in this modern era of computing, as the principle behind them is simple. However, currently they are not available in standard software.
For a confidence interval based on the likelihood-ratio test, we illustrate with the odds ratio. The multinomial likelihood for a 2 = 2 table is a function of Г„вҗІ 11,вҗІ 12 ,вҗІ 214. Equivalently, it can be expressed in terms of Г„вҗӘ ,вҗІ 1q,вҗІq14 ЕҪrecall Section 2.4.1.. Thus, in inverting a likelihood-ratio test of H0: вҗӘ s вҗӘ0 to check whether вҗӘ0 belongs in the confidence interval, there are two
nuisance parameters. Their null ML estimates вҗІЛҶ 1qЕҪвҗӘ0. and вҗІЛҶq1ЕҪвҗӘ0. that
maximize the likelihood under the null vary as вҗӘ0 does.

78

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

The profile log-likelihood function is LЕҪвҗӘ0, вҗІЛҶ 1qЕҪвҗӘ0., вҗІЛҶq1ЕҪвҗӘ0.., viewed as a
function of вҗӘ0. For each вҗӘ0 this function gives the maximum of the ordinary
log likelihood subject to the constraint вҗӘ s вҗӘ0. Evaluated at вҗӘ0 s вҗӘЛҶ, this is the maximized log likelihood LЕҪвҗӘЛҶ, вҗІЛҶ 1q, вҗІЛҶq1 ., which occurs at the sample proportions вҗІЛҶ 1qs n1qrn and вҗІЛҶq1 s nq1rn. The profile likelihood confi-
dence interval for вҗӘ is the set of вҗӘ0 for which

y2

LЕҪвҗӘ0 , вҗІЛҶ 1qЕҪ вҗӘ0 . , вҗІЛҶq1ЕҪ вҗӘ0 . . y LЕҫ вҗӘЛҶ, вҗІЛҶ 1q, вҗІЛҶq1 /

-

вҗ№

2 1

ЕҪвҗЈ

.

.

This contains all вҗӘ0 not rejected in likelihood-ratio tests of nominal size вҗЈ. The profile likelihood approach is available with some software ЕҪe.g., for
SAS, see Table A.2 in Appendix A.. A related approach, discussed in Section 6.7.1, uses a conditional likelihood function that eliminates the nuisance parameters by conditioning on their sufficient statistics. This is beneficial when there are many nuisance parameters. An advantage of score and likelihood-based intervals is that unlike the Wald, they are not adversely affected when the sample relative risk or odds ratio is 0 or Пұ.
In this section we have discussed interval estimation. Significance tests normally refer to a null hypothesis value of 0.0 for the log odds ratio, log relative risk, and difference of proportions. These are special cases of independence applied to 2 = 2 tables. In the next section we present tests of independence for two-way contingency tables.

3.2 TESTING INDEPENDENCE IN TWO-WAY CONTINGENCY TABLES
For multinomial sampling with probabilities Г„вҗІi j4 in an I = J contingency table, the null hypothesis of statistical independence is H0: вҗІi j s вҗІiqвҗІqj for all i and j. For independent multinomial samples in the I rows, independence corresponds to homogeneity of each outcome probability among the rows. Our discussion refers to a single multinomial sample, but the same tests apply with independent multinomial samples.

3.2.1 Pearson and Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Tests
In Section 1.5.2 we introduced the Pearson X 2 statistic ЕҪ1.15. for tests about multinomial probabilities. A test of H0: independence uses X 2 with ni j in place of ni and with вҗ®i j s nвҗІ iqвҗІqj in place of вҗ®i. Here вҗ®i j s EЕҪ ni j. under H0. Usually, Г„вҗІiq4 and Г„вҗІqj4 are unknown. Their ML estimates are the
sample marginal proportions вҗІЛҶiqs niqrn and вҗІЛҶqj s nqjrn, so estimated expected frequencies are Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j s nвҗІЛҶiqвҗІЛҶqj s niqnqjrn4. Then X 2 equals

X 2 s Гқ Гқ ЕҪ ni j y вҗ®ЛҶi j .2 .

ij

вҗ®ЛҶi j

ЕҪ 3 .10.

TESTING INDEPENDENCE IN TWO-WAY CONTINGENCY TABLES

79

Pearson ЕҪ1900, 1904, 1922. claimed that replacing Г„вҗ®i j4 by estimates Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j4
would not affect the distribution of X 2. Since the contingency table has IJ categories, he argued that X 2 is asymptotically chi-squared with df s IJ y 1.
On the contrary, since Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j4 require estimating Г„вҗІiq4 and Г„вҗІqj4, by Section
1.5.6
df s ЕҪ IJ y 1. y ЕҪ I y 1. y ЕҪ J y 1. s ЕҪ I y 1. ЕҪ J y 1. .

The dimensions of Г„вҗІ iq4 and Г„вҗІqj4 reflect the constraints ГқiвҗІiqs ГқjвҗІqj s 1. R. A. Fisher ЕҪ1922. corrected PearsonвҖҷs error ЕҪsee Section 16.2.. His article introduced the notion of degrees of freedom. ЕҪPearson had dealt with an indexed family of chi-squared distributions but had not dealt explicitly with вҖҳвҖҳdegrees of freedom.вҖҷвҖҷ.
The score test produces the X 2 statistic. The likelihood-ratio test produces a different one. For multinomial sampling, the kernel of the likelihood is

ЕҒ ЕҒ вҗІ ni ji j , where all вҗІi j G 0 and Гқ Гқ вҗІi j s 1.

ij

ij

Under H0: independence, вҗІЛҶi j s вҗІЛҶiqвҗІЛҶqj s niqnqjrn2. In the general case, вҗІЛҶi j s ni jrn. The ratio of the likelihoods equals

ЕҒ i ЕҒ j ЕҪ niqnqj . ni j

вҢіs n

nij .

n ЕҒiЕҒj nij

The likelihood-ratio chi-squared statistic is y2 log вҢі. Denoted by G2, it equals

G2 s y2 log вҢі s 2 Гқ Гқ ni j logЕҪ ni jrвҗ®ЛҶi j .
ij

ЕҪ 3 .11.

where Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j s niqnqjrn4. The larger the values of G2 and X 2, the more
evidence exists against independence. In the general case, the parameter space consists of Г„вҗІi j4 subject to the
linear restriction ГқiГқjвҗІi j s 1, so the dimension is IJ y 1. Under H0, Г„вҗІi j4 are determined by Г„вҗІiq4 and Г„вҗІqj4, so the dimension is ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1.. The difference in these dimensions equals ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. For large samples, G2 has a chi-squared null distribution with df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. So G2 and X 2 have the same limiting null chi-squared distribution. In fact, they are then asymptotically equivalent; X 2 y G2 converges in probability to zero ЕҪSection 14.3.4.. The limiting results for multinomial sampling also hold with other sampling schemes ЕҪRoy and Mitra 1956, Watson 1959..
These results apply as n grows, and hence Г„вҗ®i j s nвҗІi j4 grow, for a fixed number of cells. As they grow, the multinomial distribution for Г„ni j4 is better

80

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

approximated by a multivariate normal, and X 2 and G2 have more nearly chi-squared distributions. The convergence to chi-squared is quicker for X 2 than G2. The approximation is usually poor for G2 when nrIJ - 5. When I or J is large, it can be decent for X 2 when some expected frequencies are as
small as 1 but most exceed 5. In Section 9.8.4 we provide further guidelines. Small-sample methods ЕҪSection 3.5. are available whenever it is doubtful
whether n is sufficiently large.

3.2.2 Education and Religious Fundamentalism Example
Table 3.2 cross-classifies the degree of fundamentalism of subjectsвҖҷ religious beliefs by their highest degree of education. The table also contains the estimated expected frequencies for H0: independence. For instance,
вҗ®ЛҶ11 s n1qnq1rn s ЕҪ424 = 886.r2726 s 137.8. The chi-squared statistics are
X 2 s 69.2 and G2 s 69.8, with df s ЕҪ3 y 1.ЕҪ3 y 1. s 4. The P-values are - 0.0001. These statistics provide extremely strong evidence of an association.

3.3 FOLLOWING-UP CHI-SQUARED TESTS
Like any significance test, chi-squared tests of independence have limited usefulness. A small P-value indicates strong evidence of association but provides little information about the nature or strength of the association. Statisticians have long warned about dangers of relying solely on results of chi-squared tests rather than studying the nature of the association ЕҪe.g., Berkson 1938; Cochran 1954.. In this section we discuss ways to follow up the tests to learn more about the association.

TABLE 3.2 Education and Religious Beliefs

Highest Degree

Religious Beliefs Fundamentalist Moderate

Liberal

Total

Less than high school High school or junior college Bachelor or graduate

178 ЕҪ137.8.1 ЕҪ4.5.2 570 ЕҪ539.5. ЕҪ2.6. 138 ЕҪ208.7. ЕҪy6.8.

138 ЕҪ161.5. ЕҪy2.6. 648 ЕҪ632.1. ЕҪ1.3. 252 ЕҪ244.5. ЕҪ0.7.

108

424

ЕҪ124.7.

ЕҪy1.9.

442

1660

ЕҪ488.4.

ЕҪy4.0.

252

642

ЕҪ188.9.

ЕҪ6.3.

Total

886

1038

802

2726

Source: 1996 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center. 1Estimated expected frequencies for testing independence; 2 standardized Pearson residuals.

FOLLOWING-UP CHI-SQUARED TESTS

81

3.3.1 Pearson and Standardized Residuals

A cell-by-cell comparison of observed and estimated expected frequencies helps show the nature of the dependence. Under H0, larger differences
ЕҪ ni j y вҗ®ЛҶi j. tend to occur in cells with larger вҗ®i j. For Poisson sampling, for
instance, the standard deviation of ni j and hence ЕҪ ni j y вҗ®i j. is 'вҗ®i j ; the
standard deviation of ЕҪ ni j y вҗ®ЛҶi j. is less than that of ni j y вҗ®i j but is propor-
tional to 'вҗ®i j . Thus, this raw difference is insufficient. The Pearson residual,
defined for a cell by

ni j y вҗ®ЛҶi j ei j s вҗ®ЛҶi j1r2 ,

ЕҪ 3 .12.

attempts to adjust for this. Pearson residuals relate to the Pearson statistic by ГқiГқ j ei j2 s X 2.
Under H0, Г„ei j4 are asymptotically normal with mean 0. However, in Section 14.3.2 we show that their asymptotic variances are less than 1.0, averaging wЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.xrЕҪnumber of cells.. Comparing Pearson residuals to standard normal percentage points provides conservative indications of cells having lack of fit.
A standardized Pearson residual that is asymptotically standard normal results from dividing it by its standard error ЕҪHaberman 1973a; see also Section 14.3.2.. For H0: independence, this is

ni j y вҗ®ЛҶi j
вҗ®ЛҶi j ЕҪ1 y piq . ЕҪ1 y pqj . 1r2 .

ЕҪ 3 .13.

A standardized Pearson residual that exceeds about 2 or 3 in absolute value
indicates lack of fit of H0 in that cell. Larger values are more relevant when df is larger and it becomes more likely that at least one is large simply by
chance.

3.3.2 Education and Religious Fundamentalism Revisited
Table 3.2 also shows standardized Pearson residuals for testing indepen-
dence. For instance, n11 s 178 and вҗ®ЛҶ11 s 137.8. The relevant marginal
proportions equal p1qs 424r2726 s 0.156 and pq1 s 886r2726 s 0.325. The standardized Pearson residual ЕҪ3.13. for this cell equals
ЕҪ178 y 137.8. r ЕҪ137.8. ЕҪ1 y 0.156. ЕҪ1 y 0.325. 1r2 s 4.5.
This cell shows a much greater discrepancy between n11 and вҗ®ЛҶ11 than
expected if the variables were truly independent. Table 3.2 shows large positive residuals for subjects with less than a high
school education and fundamentalist views and for subjects with a bachelorвҖҷs

82

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

or graduate degree and liberal views. This means that significantly more subjects were at these combinations than H0: independence predicts. Similarly, there were fewer subjects with high levels of education and fundamentalist views and with low levels of education and liberal views than independence predicts.
Odds ratios describe this trend. The 2 = 2 table constructed from the first and last rows and the first and last columns of Table 3.2 has a sample odds ratio of ЕҪ178 = 252.rЕҪ108 = 138. s 3.0. For those with a bachelorвҖҷs or graduate degree, the estimated odds of selecting liberal instead of fundamentalist were 3.0 times the estimated odds for those with less than a high school education.

3.3.3 Partitioning Chi-Squared
Let Z denote a standard normal random variable. Then Z 2 has a chi-squared distribution with df s 1. A chi-squared random variable with df s вҗҜ has representation Z12 q РёРёРё qZвҗҜ2, where Z1, . . . , ZвҗҜ are independent standard normal variables. Thus, a chi-squared statistic having df s вҗҜ has partitionings into independent chi-squared componentsбҺҸfor example, into вҗҜ components each having df s 1. Conversely, if X12 and X22 are independent chi-squared random variables having degrees of freedom вҗҜ 1 and вҗҜ 2 , then X 2 s X12 q X22 has a chi-squared distribution with df s вҗҜ 1 q вҗҜ 2. Another supplement to a chi-squared test partitions its test statistic so that the components represent certain aspects of the effects. A partitioning may show that an association reflects primarily differences between certain categories or groupings of categories.
We begin with a partitioning for the test of independence in 2 = J tables. We partition G2, which has df s ЕҪ J y 1., into J y 1 components. The jth component is G2 for a 2 = 2 table where the first column combines columns 1 through j of the full table and the second column is column j q 1. That is, G2 for testing independence in a 2 = J table equals a statistic that compares the first two columns, plus a statistic that combines the first two columns and compares them to the third column, and so on, up to a statistic that combines the first J y 1 columns and compares them to the last column. ЕҪIn Section 9.2.4 we justify this partitioning.. Each component statistic has df s 1.
It might seem more natural to compute G2 for the ЕҪ J y 1. separate 2 = 2 tables that pair each column with a particular one, say the last. However, these component statistics are not independent and do not sum to G2 for the full table. ЕҪThis is beyond our scope at this stage but relates to the contrasts of log probabilities that form the log odds ratios for the two tables not being orthogonal..
For an I = J table, independent chi-squared components result from comparing columns 1 and 2 and then combining them and comparing them to column 3, and so on. Each of the J y 1 statistics has df s I y 1. More refined partitions contain ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. statistics, each having df s 1. One

FOLLOWING-UP CHI-SQUARED TESTS

83

such partition ЕҪLancaster 1949. applies to the ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. separate 2 = 2 tables

Гқ Гқ nab
a-i b-j
Гқ nib
b-j

Гқ naj
a-i
ni j

ЕҪ 3 .14.

for i s 2, . . . , I and j s 2, . . . , J. For others, see Gilula and Haberman ЕҪ1998. and Goodman ЕҪ1969a, 1971b..

3.3.4 Origin of Schizophrenia Example
Table 3.3 classifies a sample of psychiatrists by their school of psychiatric thought and by their opinion on the origin of schizophrenia. Here G2 s 23.04 with df s 4. To understand this association better, we partition G2 into four independent components. The partitioning ЕҪ3.14. applies to the subtables shown in Table 3.4.
The first subtable compares the eclectic and medical schools of psychiatric thought on whether the origin of schizophrenia is biogenic or environmental given that the classification was in one of these two categories. For this subtable, G2 s 0.29, with df s 1. The second subtable compares these two schools on the proportion of times the origin was ascribed to be a combination, rather than biogenic or environmental. This subtable has G2 s 1.36,

TABLE 3.3 Most Influential School of Psychiatric Thought and Ascribed Origin of Schizophrenia

School of Psychiatric Thought

Biogenic

Origin of Schizophrenia

Environmental

Combination

Eclectic

90

12

78

Medical

13

1

6

Psychoanalytic

19

13

50

Source: Reprinted with permission, based on data from B. J. Gallagher III, B. J. Jones, and L. P. Barakat, J. Clin. Psychol. 43: 438бҺҗ443 ЕҪ1987..

TABLE 3.4 Subtables Used in Partitioning Chi-Squared for Table 3.3a

Bio Env

Bio q Env Com

Bio Env

Bio q Env Com

Ecl 90 12 Ecl 102 78 Ecl q Med 103 13 Ecl q Med 116 84

Med 13 1 Med 14

6 Psy

19 13 Psy

32 50

aBio, biogenic; Com, combination; Ecl, eclectic; Env, environmental; Psy, psychoanalytic

84

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

with df s 1. The sum of these two components equals G2 for testing independence with the first two rows of Table 3.3. There is little evidence of a difference between the eclectic and medical schools of thought on the ascribed origin of schizophrenia.
Next we combine the eclectic and medical schools and compare them to the psychoanalytic school. The third subtable in Table 3.4 compares them for the ЕҪbiogenic, environmental. classification, giving G2 s 12.95 with df s 1. The fourth subtable compares them for the ЕҪbiogenic or environmental, combination. split, giving G2 s 8.43 with df s 1.
The psychoanalytic school seems more likely than the other schools to ascribe the origins of schizophrenia as being a combination. Of those who chose either the biogenetic or environmental origin, members of the psychoanalytic school were somewhat more likely than the other schools to choose the environmental origin. The sum of these four G2 components equals the value of 23.04 for testing independence in the full table.

3.3.5 Rules for Partitioning
Goodman ЕҪ1968, 1969a, 1971b. and Lancaster ЕҪ1949, 1969. gave rules for determining independent components of chi-squared. For forming subtables, among the necessary conditions are the following:
1. The df for the subtables must sum to df for the full table. 2. Each cell count in the full table must be a cell count in one and only
one subtable. 3. Each marginal total of the full table must be a marginal total for one
and only one subtable.
For a certain partitioning, when the subtable df values sum properly but the G2 values do not, the components are not independent.
For the G2 statistic, exact partitionings occur. The Pearson X 2 need not equal the sum of the X 2 values for the subtables. It is valid to use the X 2 statistics for the separate subtables; they simply need not provide an exact algebraic partitioning of X 2 for the full table. When the null hypotheses all hold, X 2 does have an asymptotic equivalence with G2, however. In addition, when the table has small counts, in large-sample chi-squared tests it is safer to use X 2 to study the subtables.

3.3.6 Limitations of Chi-Squared Tests
Chi-squared tests of independence merely indicate the degree of evidence of association. They are rarely adequate for answering all questions about a data set. Rather than relying solely on results of these tests, investigate the nature of the association: Study residuals, decompose chi-squared into components, and estimate parameters such as odds ratios that describe the strength of association.

FOLLOWING-UP CHI-SQUARED TESTS

85

The chi-squared tests also have limitations in the types of data to which
they apply. For instance, they require large samples. Also, the Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j s
niqnqjrn4 used in X 2 and G2 depend on the marginal totals but not on the order of listing the rows and columns. Thus, X 2 and G2 do not change value with arbitrary reorderings of rows or of columns. This implies that they treat both classifications as nominal. When at least one variable is ordinal, test statistics that utilize the ordinality are usually more appropriate. We present such tests in Section 3.4.

3.3.7 Why Consider Independence?

Any idealized structure such as independence is unlikely to hold in any given practical situation. With large samples such as in Table 3.2 it is not surprising to obtain a small P-value. Given this and the limitations just mentioned, why even bother to consider independence as a possible representation for a joint distribution? One reason refers to the benefits of model parsimony. If the independence model approximates the true probabilities well, then unless n
is very large, the model-based estimates Г„вҗІЛҶi j s niqnqjrn24 of cell probabili-
ties tend to be better than the sample proportions Г„ pi j s ni jrn4. The independence ML estimates smooth the sample counts, somewhat damping the random sampling fluctuations.
The mean-squared error ЕҪMSE. formula
MSE s variance q ЕҪbias. 2

explains why the independence estimators can have smaller MSE. Although
they may be biased, they have smaller variance because they are based on estimating fewer parameters ЕҪГ„вҗІiq4 and Г„вҗІqj4 instead of Г„вҗІi j4.. Hence, MSE can be smaller unless n is so large that the bias term dominates the variance.
We illustrate using Table 3.5, which has вҗІi j s вҗІiqвҗІqjw1 q вҗҰ ЕҪi y 2.ЕҪ j y 2.x for вҗІiqs вҗІqj s 31 . Here y1 - вҗҰ - 1, with вҗҰ s 0 equivalent to independence. Independence approximates the relationship well when вҗҰ is close to
zero. The total MSE values of the two estimators are

MSEЕҪ Г„ pi j4 . s Гқ Гқ EЕҪ pi j y вҗІi j . 2 s Гқ Гқ varЕҪ pi j .

ij

ij

Еҫ / s Гқ Гқ вҗІi j ЕҪ1 y вҗІi j .rn s 1 y Гқ Гқ вҗІi j2 n

ij

ij

MSEЕҪ Г„вҗІЛҶi j4 . s Гқ Гқ EЕҪвҗІЛҶi j y вҗІi j .2 .
ij

TABLE 3.5
ЕҪ1 q вҗҰ .r9 1r9
ЕҪ1 y вҗҰ .r9

Cell Probabilities for Comparison of Estimators

1r9

ЕҪ1 y вҗҰ .r9

1r9

1r9

1r9

ЕҪ1 q вҗҰ .r9

86

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 3.6 Comparison of Total MSE(=10,000)for Sample Proportion and Independence Estimators

вҗҰs0

вҗҰ s 0.1

вҗҰ s 0.2

вҗҰ s 0.6

вҗҰ s 1.0

n

p

вҗІЛҶ

p

вҗІЛҶ

p

вҗІЛҶ

p

вҗІЛҶ

p

вҗІЛҶ

10 889 489 888 493 887 505 871 634 840 893

50 178

91 178

95 177 110 174 261 168 565

100 89

45

89

50

89

65

87 220

84 529

500 18

9

18

14

18

28

17 186

17 500

Пұ

0

0

0

5

0

20

0 178

0 494

For Table 3.5,

ВҪ 5 MSEЕҪГ„ pi j4 . s y 1 8 4вҗҰ 2 n 9 81

and rather tedious calculations yield

ВҪ 5 ВҪ 5 MSEЕҪГ„вҗІЛҶi j4. s q q 1 4 4 4вҗҰ 1 y q 2 y 3 . 2 2 2 2

n 9 9n

81

nn n

Table 3.6 lists the total MSE values for various вҗҰ and n. When вҗҰ s 0,
MSEЕҪГ„ pi j4. s 8r9n, whereas MSEЕҪГ„вҗІЛҶi j4. f 4r9n for large n. The indepen-
dence estimator is then much better than the sample proportions. When the table is close to independence ЕҪвҗҰ f 0. and n is not large, MSE is only about
half as large for the independence estimator. When вҗҰ / 0, the inconsistency
of Г„вҗІЛҶi j4 is reflected by MSEЕҪГ„вҗІЛҶi j4. в„ў 4вҗҰ 2r81 wwhereas MSEЕҪГ„ pi j4. в„ў 0x as
n в„ў Пұ. When the table is close to independence, however, the independence estimator has a lower total MSE even for moderately large n ЕҪe.g., for n s 500 when вҗҰ s 0.1..

3.4 TWO-WAY TABLES WITH ORDERED CLASSIFICATIONS
The X 2 and G2 chi-squared tests ignore some information when used to test independence between ordinal classifications. When rows andror columns are ordered, more powerful tests usually exist.
3.4.1 Linear Trend Alternative to Independence When the row variable X and the column variable Y are ordinal, a positive or negative trend in the association is common. One approach to inference, described later in this section, uses an ordinal measure of monotone trend.

TWO-WAY TABLES WITH ORDERED CLASSIFICATIONS

87

A more popular analysis assigns scores to categories and summarizes the
linear trend. A test statistic that is sensitive to positive or negative linear trends utilizes
correlation information. Let u1 F u2 F РёРёРё F uI denote scores for the rows, and let В®1 F В®2 F РёРёРё F В®J denote column scores. The scores have the same ordering as the categories. They assign distances between categories and
actually treat the measurement scale as interval, with greater distances
between categories that are farther apart. The sum ГқiГқj uiВ®j ni j weights cross-products of scores by their frequency.
It relates to the covariation of X and Y. For the scores chosen, the correlation r between X and Y equals the standardization of this sum to the y1 to q1 scale ЕҪin fact, r equals this sum when both sets of scores are linearly transformed for the n subjects to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.. The larger the correlation is in absolute value, the farther the
data fall from independence in this linear dimension.
A statistic for testing independence against the two-sided alternative of
nonzero true correlation is

M 2 s ЕҪ n y 1. r2 .

ЕҪ 3 .15.

This statistic increases as < r < or n do. For large samples, it is approximately chi-squared with df s 1 ЕҪMantel 1963.. Large values contradict independence, so as with X 2 and G2, the P-value is the right-tailed probability above the value observed. A small P-value does not imply that the association is linear, merely that searching for a linear component to the association helped to build power against H0. The test treats the variables symmetrically.

3.4.2 Job Satisfaction Example Revisited
Table 2.8 showed job satisfaction and income for 96 subjects. The ordinary chi-squared statistics for testing independence are X 2 s 6.0 and G2 s 6.8 with df s 9 ЕҪ P-values s 0.74 and 0.66.. These statistics show little evidence of association, but they ignore the ordering of rows and columns. With scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4. for job satisfaction and scores Г„7.5, 20, 32.5, 604 for income that approximate midpoints of categories in thousands of dollars, the correlation is r s 0.200. The linear trend test statistic M 2 s ЕҪ96 y 1.ЕҪ0.200.2 s 3.81. This shows some evidence of association ЕҪ P s 0.051.. The evidence is stronger
for the one-sided ЕҪpositive trend. alternative, using M s 'n y 1 r s 1.95
ЕҪ P s 0.026.. The nontrivial evidence of positive association may be surprising, since X 2
and G2 have such unimpressive values. When a positive or negative trend exists, analyses designed to detect that trend can provide much smaller P-values than analyses that ignore it.

88

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

3.4.3 Monotone Trend Alternatives to Independence
Ordinal variables do not have a specified metric. Detecting a linear trend alternative to independence requires assigning scores to X and Y, treating them as interval variables. Alternatively, a strict ordinal analysis with the weaker alternative of monotonicity uses an ordinal measure of association, such as gamma ЕҪSection 2.4.4..
For large random samples, sample gamma has approximately a normal sampling distribution. The standard error ЕҪSE. follows from the delta method ЕҪProblem 3.27.. Gamma is the basis of an ordinal test of independence using
test statistic z s вҗҘЛҶrSE. A confidence interval describes the strength of
positive or negative monotone association. For Table 2.8 on income and job satisfaction, in Section 2.4.5 we showed
that вҗҘЛҶ s 0.221. The sample has a weak tendency for job satisfaction to be
higher at higher income levels. Software ЕҪe.g., PROC FREQ in SAS. reports a standard error of 0.117 for gamma. There is some evidence that вҗҘ ) 0, since z s 0.221r0.117 s 1.89 ЕҪ P s 0.03 for the one-sided alternative.. An approximate 95% confidence interval for вҗҘ is 0.221 " 1.96ЕҪ0.117., or ЕҪy0.01, 0.45.. The true association between income and job satisfaction is at best moderately positive.

3.4.4 Extra Power with Ordinal Tests
For testing independence, X 2 and G2 refer to the most general alternative, whereby cell probabilities exhibit any type of statistical dependence. Their df value of ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. reflects an alternative hypothesis that has ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. more parameters than the null hypothesisбҺҸthe nonredundant odds ratios that describe the association wsuch as ЕҪ2.10.x. These statistics are designed to detect any pattern for these parameters. In achieving this generality, they sacrifice sensitivity for detecting particular patterns.
By contrast, the analyses for ordinal row and column variables attempt to describe association using a single parameter. For instance, M 2 uses the correlation. When a chi-squared test statistic refers to a single parameter
wsuch as M 2 or ЕҪвҗҘЛҶrSE.2 dox, it has df s 1. When the association truly has a
positive or negative trend, an ordinal test has a power advantage over the tests using X 2 or G2. Since df equals the mean of the chi-squared distribution, a relatively large M 2 value with df s 1 falls farther out in its right-hand tail than a comparable value of X 2 or G2 with df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.; falling farther out in the tail produces a smaller P-value. The potential discrepancy in power increases as I and J increase. In Section 6.4 we present the theory behind such a power comparison.

3.4.5 Choice of Scores Often, it is unclear how to assign scores to statistics that require them, such as M 2. Cochran ЕҪ1954. noted that вҖҳвҖҳany set of scores gives a В®alid test,

TWO-WAY TABLES WITH ORDERED CLASSIFICATIONS

89

provided that they are constructed without consulting the results of the experiment. If the set of scores is poor, in that it badly distorts a numerical scale that really does underlie the ordered classification, the test will not be sensitive. The scores should therefore embody the best insight available about the way in which the classification was constructed and used.вҖҷвҖҷ Ideally, the scale is chosen by a consensus of experts, and subsequent interpretations use that same scale.
How sensitive are analyses to the choice or scores? There is no simple answer, but different scoring systems can give quite different results ЕҪe.g., Graubard and Korn 1987.. For most data sets, different choices of monotone scores give similar results. Scores that are linear transforms of each other, such as ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4. and ЕҪ0, 2, 4, 6., have the same absolute correlation and hence the same M 2. Results may depend on the scores, however, when the data are highly unbalanced, with some categories having many more observations than others.
Table 3.7 illustrates the potential dependence. It refers to a prospective study of maternal drinking and congenital malformations. After the first three months of pregnancy, the women in the sample completed a questionnaire about alcohol consumption. Following childbirth, observations were recorded on the presence or absence of congenital sex organ malformations. When a variable is nominal but has only two categories, statistics that treat it as ordinal are still valid. For instance, we can artificially regard malformation as ordinal, treating вҖҳвҖҳpresentвҖҷвҖҷ as вҖҳвҖҳhighвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳabsentвҖҷвҖҷ as вҖҳвҖҳlow.вҖҷвҖҷ With only two rows, any set of distinct row scores is a linear transformation of any other set and gives the same M 2 value. Alcohol consumption, measured as the average number of drinks per day, is an ordinal explanatory variable. This groups a naturally continuous variable, and we first use the scores Г„В®1 s 0, В®2 s 0.5, В®3 s 1.5, В®4 s 4.0, В®5 s 7.04, the last score being somewhat arbitrary. For this choice, M 2 s 6.57, for which the P-value is 0.010. By contrast, for the equally spaced row scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4, 5., M 2 s 1.83, giving a much weaker conclusion ЕҪ P s 0.18..
An alternative approach uses the data to form the scores automatically, by using ranks as the category scores. All subjects in a category receive the average of the ranks that would apply for a complete ranking of the sample from 1 to n. These are called midranks. The 17,114 subjects at level 0 for

TABLE 3.7 Example for which Results Depend on Choice of Scores

Malformation

Alcohol Consumption ЕҪaverage number of drinks per day.

0

-1

1бҺҗ2

3бҺҗ5

G6

Absent Present

17,066

14,464

788

126

37

48

38

5

1

1

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Biometric Society ЕҪGraubard and Korn 1987..

90

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

alcohol consumption share ranks 1 through 17,114. Each receives the average of these ranks, which is the midrank ЕҪ1 q 17,114.r2 s 8557.5. Similarly, the midranks for the last four categories are 24,365.5, 32,013, 32,473, and 32,555.5. These scores yield M 2 s 0.35 and a weaker conclusion yet ЕҪ P s 0.55..
Why does this happen? Adjacent categories having relatively few observations necessarily have similar midranks. The midranks are similar for the final three categories, since those categories have few observations compared with the first two categories. This scoring scheme treats alcohol consumption level 1бҺҗ2 drinks ЕҪcategory 3. as much closer to consumption level G 6 drinks ЕҪcategory 5. than to consumption level 0 drinks ЕҪcategory 1.. This seems inappropriate. It is usually better to select scores that reflect distances between categories. When uncertain about this choice, a sensitivity analysis should be performed, selecting two or three sensible choices and checking whether results are similar. Equally spaced scores often provide a reasonable compromise when the category labels do not suggest obvious choices, such as the categories ЕҪliberal, moderate, conservative. for political philosophy.
When X and Y are both ordinal and M 2 uses midrank scores, the correlation on which M 2 is based is called SpearmanвҖҷs rho.

3.4.6 Trend Tests for I = 2 and 2 = J Tables
When I or J equal 2, the tests based on linear or monotonic trend simplify to well-established procedures. With binary X, 2 = J tables occur in comparisons of two groups, such as when the rows represent two treatments. Using scores Г„u1 s 0, u2 s 14 for levels of X, the covariation measure ГқiГқj ui В®j ni j in M 2 simplifies to Гқj В®j n2 j. This term sums the scores on Y for all subjects in row 2. Divided by the number of subjects in row 2, it gives the mean score for that row. In fact, M 2 is then directed toward detecting differences between the two row means of the scores on Y.
With midrank scores for Y, the test using M 2 for 2 = J tables is sensitive to differences in mean ranks for the two rows. This test is called the Wilcoxon or MannбҺҗWhitney test. Most nonparametric statistics textbooks present this test for fully ranked response data, whereas the 2 = J table is an extended case in which sets of subjects in the same category of Y are tied and use midranks. The large-sample version of that nonparametric test uses a standard normal z statistic. The square of the statistic is equivalent to M 2, using arbitrary row scores and midranks for the columns. It is also asymptotically equivalent to test statistics based on the numbers of concordant and discordant pairs, such as the one using gamma.
When Y has two levels, the table has size I = 2. The linear trend statistic then refers to a linear trend in the probability of either response category, such as the probability of malformation as a function of alcohol consumption. The test in that case, often called the CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test, is presented in Section 5.3.5.

SMALL-SAMPLE TESTS OF INDEPENDENCE

91

3.4.7 NominalвҖ“Ordinal Tables
The tests using the correlation or gamma are appropriate when both classifications are ordinal. When one is nominal with more than two categories, other statistics are needed. One is based on summarizing the variation among means on the ordinal variable in the various categories of the nominal variable. We defer discussion of this case to Section 7.5.3, Note 3.6, and Problem 3.28.

3.5 SMALL-SAMPLE TESTS OF INDEPENDENCE
The inferential methods of the preceding four sections are large-sample methods. When n is small, alternative methods use exact small-sample distributions rather than large-sample approximations. In this section we describe small-sample tests of independence, starting with one that R. A. Fisher proposed for 2 = 2 tables.

3.5.1 FisherвҖҷs Exact Test for 2 = 2 Tables

In Section 3.5.7 we show that a distribution not depending on unknown parameters results from conditioning on the marginal totals of the contingency table. These are usually not naturally fixed. For Poisson sampling nothing is fixed, for multinomial sampling only n is fixed, and for independent binomial sampling in the two rows only the row marginal totals are fixed. In any of these cases, under H0: independence, conditioning on both sets of marginal totals yields the hypergeometric distribution

n1q

n2q

Еҫ / Еҫ / pЕҪ t. s PЕҪ n11 s t. s t

nq1 y t .

n

Еҫ /nq1

ЕҪ 3 .16.

This formula expresses the distribution of Г„ni j4 in terms of only n11. Given the marginal totals, n11 determines the other three cell counts. The range of possible values for n11 is myF n11 F mq, where mys maxЕҪ0, n1qq nq1 y n. and mqs minЕҪ n1q, nq1 ..
For 2 = 2 tables, independence is equivalent to the odds ratio вҗӘ s 1. To
test H0: вҗӘ s 1, the P-value is the sum of certain hypergeometric probabilities. To illustrate, consider Ha: вҗӘ ) 1. For the given marginal totals, tables having larger n11 have larger sample odds ratios and hence stronger evidence in favor of Ha. Thus, the P-value equals PЕҪ n11 G to., where to denotes the observed value of n11. This test for 2 = 2 tables is called FisherвҖҷs exact test ЕҪFisher 1934, 1935a,c; Irwin 1935; Yates 1934..

92

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

3.5.2 FisherвҖҷs Tea Drinker
R. A. Fisher ЕҪ1935a. described the following experiment from his days at Rothamsted Experiment Station, an agriculture research lab north of London. Muriel Bristol, a colleague of FisherвҖҷs, claimed that when drinking tea she could distinguish whether milk or tea was added to the cup first ЕҪshe preferred milk first.. To test her claim, Fisher asked her to taste eight cups of tea, four of which had milk added first and four of which had tea added first. She knew there were four cups of each type and had to predict which four had the milk added first. The order of presenting the cups to her was randomized.
Table 3.8 shows a possible result. Distinguishing the order of pouring better than with pure guessing corresponds to вҗӘ ) 1, reflecting a positive association between order of pouring and the prediction. We conduct FisherвҖҷs exact test of H0: вҗӘ s 1 against Ha: вҗӘ ) 1.
The experimental design fixed both marginal distributions, since Dr. Bristol had to predict which four cups had milk added first. Thus, the hypergeometric applies naturally for the null distribution of n11. The P-value for FisherвҖҷs exact test is the null probability of Table 3.8 and of tables having even more evidence in favor of her claim. The observed table, to s 3 correct choices of the cups having milk added first, has null probability

Еҫ 34 / Еҫ 14 / Еҫ / s 0.229.
8 4

The only table that is more extreme in the direction of Ha has n11 s 4 correct. It has a probability of 0.014. The P-value is PЕҪ n11 G 3. s 0.243. This result does not establish an association between the actual order of pouring
and her predictions. It is difficult to do so with such a small sample. According to FisherвҖҷs daughter ЕҪBox 1978, p. 134., in reality Bristol did
convince Fisher of her ability.

TABLE 3.8 FisherвҖҷs Tea Tasting Experiment

Poured First

Guess Poured First

Milk

Tea

Total

Milk Tea

3

1

4

1

3

4

Total

4

4

Source: Based on experiment described by Fisher ЕҪ1935a..

SMALL-SAMPLE TESTS OF INDEPENDENCE

93

3.5.3 Two-Sided P-Values for FisherвҖҷs Exact Test
For the one-sided alternative, the same P-value results using tables ordered according to larger n11, larger odds ratio, or larger difference of proportions ЕҪDavis 1986a.. For the two-sided alternative, different criteria can have different P-values.
For a two-sided P-value, a popular approach sums PЕҪ n11 s t. in ЕҪ3.16. for counts t such that pЕҪt. F pЕҪto.; that is, the P-value is P s Pw pЕҪ n11. F pЕҪt0.x for the observed value to. Another possibility sums pЕҪt. for tables that are farther from H0; that is,

P s P n11 y EЕҪ n11 . G t0 y EЕҪ n11 . ,

where the hypergeometric EЕҪ n11. s n1qnq1rn. This is identical to PЕҪ X 2 G X 2o . for observed Pearson statistic Xo2. A third approach takes P s 2 minw PЕҪ n11 G to., PЕҪ n11 F to.x, but this can exceed 1. A fourth approach takes P s minw PЕҪ n11 G to., PЕҪ n11 F to.x plus an attainable probability in the other tail that is as close as possible to, but not greater than, that one-tailed probability.
Each approach has advantages and disadvantages ЕҪBlaker 2000; Davis 1986a; Dupont 1986; Lloyd 1988b; Mantel 1987b; Yates and discussants 1984.. They can provide different results because of the discreteness and potential skewness. The approach of ordering tables by a distance measure from H0, such as X 2, extends naturally to I = J tables.
In practice, two-sided tests are much more common than one-sided. Partly this is so that researchers can avoid charges of bias in giving evidence that supports their predicted direction for an effect. To conduct a test of size 0.05 when one truly believes that the effect has a particular direction, it is safest to conduct the one-sided test at the 0.025 level to guard against criticism. For instance, in the 1998 document Biostatistical Principles for Clinical Trials, the International Conference on Harmonization ЕҪICH E9. stated: вҖҳвҖҳThe approach of setting type I errors for one-sided tests at half the conventional type I error used in two-sided tests is preferable in regulatory settings. This promotes consistency with two-sided confidence intervals that are generally appropriate for estimating the possible size of the difference between two treatments.вҖҷвҖҷ

3.5.4 Discreteness and Conservatism Issues
The hypergeometric distribution ЕҪ3.16. is highly discrete for small samples, as n11 and hence the P-value can assume relatively few values. It is usually not possible to achieve a fixed significance level ЕҪsize. such as 0.05.
In the tea-tasting experiment, for instance, n11 can equal only 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. The one-sided P-values are restricted to 0.014, 0.243, 0.757, 0.986, and 1.0. If

94

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

one rejects H0 when the P-value does not exceed 0.05, then 0.05 is not the probability of type I error. Only the P-value of 0.014 does not exceed 0.05; thus, when H0 is true, the probability of falsely rejecting it is 0.014, not 0.05. In this sense, the traditional approach to hypothesis testing is conservative: The true probability of type I error is less than the nominal level.
It is possible to achieve any fixed significance level by data-unrelated randomization on the boundary of the critical region, in deciding whether to reject H0. For the tea-tasting experiment, suppose that we reject H0 when n11 s 4, we reject H0 with probability 0.157 when n11 s 3, and we do not reject H0 otherwise; that is, when n11 s 3, we generate a uniform random variable U over w0, 1x and reject H0 if U - 0.157. For expectation taken with respect to the null hypergeometric distribution of n11, the significance level equals
P ЕҪreject H0 . s E P ЕҪreject H0 < n11 .
s 1.0ЕҪ0.014. q 0.157ЕҪ0.229. q 0.0 = P ЕҪ n11 F 2. s 0.05.
With the randomization extension, Tocher ЕҪ1950. showed that FisherвҖҷs test is uniformly most powerful unbiased ЕҪUMPU..
In practice, randomization having nothing to do with the data is unacceptable. We recommend simply reporting the P-value. To reduce conservativeness, report the mid-P-value ЕҪSection 1.4.5.. The test is no longer guaranteed to have true PЕҪtype I error. no greater than the nominal value, but in practice it is rarely much greater. For the one-sided test with the tea-tasting data,
mid-P-value s ЕҪ1r2. P ЕҪ n11 s 3. q P ЕҪ n11 ) 3. s 0.129.

3.5.5 Small-Sample Unconditional Test of Independence*
A common sampling assumption for analyses comparing two groups on a binary response is that the rows are independent binomial samples. Then, only Г„niq4 are naturally fixed. For Poisson and multinomial sampling schemes, neither marginal distribution is fixed. For such cases it may seem artificial to condition on both sets of marginal counts. An alternative small-sample test, designed for independent binomial samples, conditions on only the row totals.
Under binomial sampling with parameter вҗІi in row i, consider testing H0: вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 using some test statistic T, such as the Pearson X 2. For fixed Г„niq4, T can take a discrete set of values, one of which is the observed value to. Given вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 s вҗІ , the P-value is PвҗІ ЕҪT G to., calculated using the product of the two binomial probability mass functions. This is the sum of the product binomial probabilities for those pairs of binomial samples that have T G to. Since вҗІ is unknown, the actual P-value is defined as
P s sup PвҗІ ЕҪ T G to . .
0FвҗІF1

SMALL-SAMPLE TESTS OF INDEPENDENCE

95

This is an unconditional small-sample test of independence. Like FisherвҖҷs exact test, the true size is no greater than the nominal value ЕҪe.g., if we reject when P F 0.05, the actual PЕҪtype I error. is no greater than 0.05..

We illustrate using test statistic X 2 for the 2 = 2 table having entries ЕҪ3, 0r0, 3., by row, with fixed row totals ЕҪ3, 3. as binomial sample sizes.

The sample X 2 s 6.0. This X 2 value for the observed table and for table ЕҪ0, 3r3, 0. is the maximum possible. For a given value вҗІ for вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 , the probability of the first table is wвҗІ 3ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .0 xwвҗІ 0ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .3x s вҗІ 3ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .3 ЕҪ3 successes and 0 failures in the first row and 0 successes and 3 failures in the second., the product of two binomial probabilities. Similarly, the probability of the second table is ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .3вҗІ 3. Thus, the P-value is PвҗІ ЕҪ X 2 G 6. s 2вҗІ 3ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .3, the sum of the product binomial probabilities for those two

Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / tables. The supremum of this over 0 F вҗІ F 1 occurs at вҗІ s 21 , giving overall
P-value equal to 2ЕҪ0.5.3ЕҪ0.5.3 s 0.031. By contrast, the two-sided FisherвҖҷs

exact test has P-value equal to 2 3 3 r 6 s 0.100.

03

3

Barnard ЕҪ1945, 1947. first proposed an unconditional test comparing bino-

mial parameters, although he later ЕҪ1949. refuted it in favor of FisherвҖҷs exact

test. Several authors have since proposed related tests ЕҪe.g., Haber 1986;

Suissa and Shuster 1985..

3.5.6 Conditional versus Unconditional Tests*
Since Barnard introduced the unconditional test, statisticians have debated the proper way to conduct small-sample analyses of 2 = 2 tables. Fisher criticized the unconditional approach, arguing that possible samples with quite different numbers of successes than observed were not relevant. In FisherвҖҷs ЕҪ1945. view, вҖҳвҖҳ . . . the existence of these less informative possibilities should not affect our judgment of significance based on the series actually observed . . . . The fact that such an unhelpful outcome as these might occur . . . is surely no reason for enhancing our judgment of significance in cases where it has not occurred; . . . it is only the sampling distribution of samples of the same type that can supply a rational test of significance.вҖҷвҖҷ Sprott ЕҪ2000, Sec. 6.4.4. recently provided a similar argument.
An adaptation of the unconditional approach by Berger and Boos ЕҪ1994. addresses this criticism somewhat. They took the supremum for the P-value over a confidence interval of values for the nuisance parameter вҗІ rather than over all possible values. Their unconditional P-value is
P s sup PвҗІ ЕҪ T G to . q вҗҘ ,
вҗІgC вҗҘ
where CвҗҘ is a 100ЕҪ1 y вҗҘ .% confidence interval for вҗІ . Here, вҗҘ is taken to be very small ЕҪe.g., 0.001., and the test maintains the guaranteed upper bound on size.

96

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

Other arguments in favor of conditioning on both sets of marginal totals are that the conditional approach provides a simple way to eliminate nuisance parameters in a variety of problems ЕҪe.g., generalizing to other contingency table problems., and the margins contain little information about the association ЕҪHaber 1989; Yates 1984.. Zhu and Reid ЕҪ1994. noted that some information loss occurs in conditioning on the margins except when вҗӘ s 1. Arguments against conditioning partly concern the increased discreteness that occurs. The few possible values for n11 make it difficult to obtain a small P-value. In repeated use with a nominal significance level, the actual type I error probability may be much smaller than the nominal value and the power may suffer. Finally, for inference about nonnull values ЕҪe.g, confidence intervals., we will see that the conditional approach applies only with the odds ratio and not other measures.
The conservatism problem is partly unavoidable. Statistics having discrete distributions are necessarily conservative in terms of achieving nominal significance levels. Because an unconditional test fixes only one margin, however, it has many more tables in the reference set for its sampling distribution. That distribution is less discrete, and a richer array of possible P-values occurs than with FisherвҖҷs exact test. An unconditional test tends to be less conservative and more powerful than FisherвҖҷs exact test. A disadvantage is that computations are very intensive for more complex problems, such as larger tables.
If a table truly has two independent binomial samples, the unconditional approach seems sensible. See Kempthorne ЕҪ1979. for a cogent argument. The conditional approach is useful for other cases. In a randomized clinical trial a convenience sample of n subjects is randomly allocated to two treatments. The samples are not binomials, as they are not random samples from two populations of interest. One could focus on the sample alone and consider the probability of a result at least as extreme as observed if there truly is no treatment effect. For instance, out of all possible ways of choosing n1q of the n subjects for treatment 1, for what proportion would n11 be at least as large as observed? Under the null hypothesis of no treatment effect, the same overall response distribution ЕҪ nq1, nq2 . of successes and failures occurs regardless of the allocation of subjects to treatments. Thus, the column margin is also naturally fixed. This argument leads to hypergeometric null probabilities and FisherвҖҷs exact test ЕҪGreenland 1981.. This argument does not extend, however, to nonnull effect values and hence to confidence intervals.
When both sets of marginal totals are naturally fixed, such as in Table 3.8, the high degree of discreteness is unavoidable and FisherвҖҷs exact test is the best procedure. Regardless of which margins are naturally fixed, using the mid-P-value helps reduce conservative effects of discreteness.

3.5.7 Derivation of Exact Conditional Distribution*
We now show how the conditional test for independence yields the hypergeometric distribution. We do this for I = J tables, since we next discuss

SMALL-SAMPLE TESTS OF INDEPENDENCE

97

extensions of FisherвҖҷs exact test for them. We assume independent multino-

mial sampling within rows, as often applies in comparing I treatment groups. Then row totals Г„niq4 are fixed, and we estimate the I conditional distributions Г„вҗІ j<i, j s 1, . . . , J 4. Under H0: independence, вҗІ j<1 s вҗІ j<2 s РёРёРё s вҗІj< I s вҗІqj , for j s 1, . . . , J. The product of the I multinomial probability functions then simplifies to

Еҫ / niq!

n

ЕҪ

ЕҒ

i

n

iq!

.

ЕҪ

ЕҒ

вҗІ nqj
j qj

.

ЕҒ

ЕҒ

вҗІ

j

<

i
i

j

s

.

i ЕҒjnij! j

ЕҒ i ЕҒ j ni j!

ЕҪ 3 .17.

This distribution for Г„ni j4 depends on Г„вҗІqj4. These are nuisance parameters, since they do not describe the association. Fisher introduced the standard way of eliminating nuisance parameters, by conditioning on their sufficient statistics. From the definition of sufficiency, the resulting conditional distribution does not depend on those parameters.
The contribution of Г„вҗІqj4 to the product multinomial distribution ЕҪ3.17. depends on the data only through Г„nqj4, which are their sufficient statistics. The Г„nqj4 have the multinomial ЕҪ n,Г„вҗІqj4. distribution, namely

n! ЕҒ вҗІqnqj j .
ЕҒ j nqj ! j

ЕҪ 3 .18.

The joint probability function of Г„ni j4 and Г„nqj4 is identical to the probability function of Г„ ni j4, since Г„ni j4 determines Г„ nqj4. Thus, the probability function of Г„ ni j4, conditional on Г„ nqj4, equals the probability function ЕҪ3.17. of Г„ ni j4 divided by the probability function ЕҪ3.18. evaluated at Г„nqj4, or

ЕҪЕҒ i niq!. ЕҪЕҒ j nqj !. .
n!ЕҒ i ЕҒ j ni j !

ЕҪ 3 .19.

This is the multiple hypergeometric distribution. It applies to the set of Г„ni j4 having the same Г„niq4 and Г„nqj4 as the observed table. For 2 = 2 tables, it is the hypergeometric distribution ЕҪ3.16..
When a table has a single multinomial sample, the unknown parameters are Г„вҗІi j4. For testing independence ЕҪвҗІi j s вҗІiqвҗІqj all i and j., distribution ЕҪ3.19. results from conditioning on the row and column totals. These are sufficient statistics for Г„вҗІiq4 and Г„вҗІqj4, which determine the null distribution. For either sampling model, both sets of margins are fixed after the conditioning. The end result ЕҪ3.19. does not depend on unknown parameters and thus
permits exact probability calculations.

3.5.8 Exact Tests of Independence for I = J Tables* Exact tests for I = J tables utilize the multiple hypergeometric distribution. Freeman and Halton ЕҪ1951. defined the P-value as the probability of the set

98

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 3.9 Example for Exact Conditional Test

Smoking Level ЕҪcigarettesrday.

0

1бҺҗ24

) 25

Control

25

25

12

Myocardial infarction

0

1

3

Source: Reprinted with permission, based on Table 5 in S. Shapiro et al., Lancet 743бҺҗ746 ЕҪ1979..

of tables with the given margins that are no more likely to occur than the table observed. Other exact tests order the tables using a statistic describing distance from H0. Yates ЕҪ1934. used X 2. The P-value is then the null value of PЕҪ X 2 G Xo2 . for observed value Xo2. When classifications have ordered categories, an ordinal statistic is more relevant. For the alternative hypothesis of a positive association, we could use PЕҪT G to., where T is the correlation or gamma and where to denotes its observed value.
We illustrate an exact test for ordered categories with Table 3.9, which cross-classifies level of smoking and myocardial infarction for a sample of young women in a caseбҺҗcontrol study. The second row contains small counts, and large-sample tests may be inappropriate. Given the marginal counts, the only table having greater evidence of positive association between smoking and myocardial infarction has counts ЕҪ25,26,11. for row 1 and ЕҪ0,0,4. in row 2. Conditional on both sets of margins, the null probability of the observed table and this more extreme table wbased on formula ЕҪ3.19.x equals 0.018. Although the sample contains only four myocardial infarction patients, evidence exists of a positive association. The evidence is stronger than using X 2, which ignores the ordering of categories. The exact PЕҪ X 2 G Xo2 . s PЕҪ X 2 G 6.96. s 0.052.
Special algorithms and software for computing exact tests for I = J tables are widely available ЕҪe.g., Mehta and Patel 1983; see also Appendix A.. We recommend these tests when asymptotic approximations may be invalid. Computing time increases exponentially as n, I, or J increase. However, one can use Monte Carlo to sample randomly from the set of tables with the given margins. The estimated P-value is then the sample proportion of tables having test statistic value at least as large as the value observed.
As I andror J increase, the number of possible values for any test statistic T tends to increase. Thus, the conservativeness issue for conditional tests becomes less problematic.

3.6 SMALL-SAMPLE CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR 2 = 2 TABLES*
Small-sample methods also apply to estimation. Exact distributions depending only on the parameter of interest result from the same arguments. These

SMALL-SAMPLE CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR 2 = 2 TABLES

99

distributions are the basis of confidence intervals for measures such as the odds ratio.

3.6.1 Small-Sample Inference for the Odds Ratio For multinomial sampling, the distribution of Г„ni j4 depends on n and cell probabilities Г„вҗІi j4. For 2 = 2 tables, the odds ratio is

вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 вҗІ 11 ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ 1qy вҗІq1 q вҗІ 11 . вҗӘ s вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 s ЕҪ вҗІ 1qy вҗІ 11 . ЕҪ вҗІq1 y вҗІ 11 . .

Hence, вҗІ 11 is a function of вҗӘ and Г„вҗІ 1q,вҗІq14. The same argument applies to any вҗІi j, so the multinomial distribution of Г„ni j4 can use parameters Г„вҗӘ , вҗІ 1q, вҗІq14. Conditional on Г„ n1q, nq14, the distribution of Г„ ni j4 depends only on вҗӘ. Since n11 determines all other cell counts, given the marginal totals, the conditional distribution of Г„ni j4 is specified by some function PЕҪ n11 s t. s f ЕҪt; n1q, nq1, n, вҗӘ .. This distribution ЕҪFisher 1935c. is the noncentral hypergeometric,

f ЕҪ t ; n1q, nq1 , n, вҗӘ . s

Еҫ /n1q n y n1q вҗӘ t

Еҫ / t

nq1 y t

mq n1q
Еҫ / Еҫ / Гқ
usmy u

n y n1q вҗӘ u nq1 y u

ЕҪ 3 .20.

for myF t F mq. A confidence interval for вҗӘ results from inverting the test of H0: вҗӘ s вҗӘ0,
having observed n11 s to. For Ha: вҗӘ ) вҗӘ0, the P-value is
P s Гқ f ЕҪ t ; n1q, nq1 , n, вҗӘ0 . .
tGt o
For testing against H0: вҗӘ - вҗӘ0,
P s Гқ f ЕҪ t ; n1q, nq1 , n, вҗӘ0 . .
tFt o
When вҗӘ0 s 1, these are one-sided FisherвҖҷs exact tests. Cornfield ЕҪ1956. constructed a confidence interval using the tail method. The lower endpoint is вҗӘ0 for which P s вҗЈr2 in testing against Ha: вҗӘ ) вҗӘ0. The upper endpoint is вҗӘ0 for which P s вҗЈr2 for Ha: вҗӘ - вҗӘ0. The interval is the set of вҗӘ0 for which both one-sided P-values G вҗЈr2.
As in FisherвҖҷs exact test, the conditional approach to interval estimation is necessarily conservative because of discreteness. The actual confidence coefficient, defined as the infimum of the coverage probabilities for all possible вҗӘ , has the nominal confidence level as a lower bound. Less conservative

100

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

behavior and shorter intervals result from inverting a single two-sided test rather than inverting two one-sided tests ЕҪAgresti and Min 2001; Baptista and Pike 1977.. An alternative approach with independent binomial samples
inverts nonnull unconditional small-sample tests. Because of the reduced
discreteness, such intervals are also usually shorter. The conditional ML estimate of вҗӘ is the value of вҗӘ that maximizes
probability ЕҪ3.20.. Differentiating the log likelihood with respect to вҗӘ shows that this estimate satisfies the equation n11 s EЕҪ n11. in вҗӘ , where the expecta-
tion refers to distribution ЕҪ3.20.. This equation has a unique solution вҗӘЛҶ and is
solved using iterative methods ЕҪCornfield 1956.. This estimator differs from
the unconditional ML estimator вҗӘЛҶs n11 n22rn12 n21, which uses the ML esti-
mates of Г„вҗІi j4 for the multinomial distribution of Г„ni j4. Using statistical software, we can calculate conditional ML estimates and small-sample confidence intervals for odds ratios ЕҪe.g., for SAS, see Table A.2..

3.6.2 Tea Tasting Example
We illustrate with Table 3.8 from FisherвҖҷs tea-tasting experiment. The conditional ML estimate of вҗӘ is 6.4. Software provides the Cornfield tail-method interval ЕҪ0.2, 626.2. with confidence coefficient guaranteed G 0.95. Not surprisingly, it is very wide because of the small sample. Inverting a family of two-sided вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ conditional score tests gives a more precise interval, ЕҪ0.3, 306.2.. The unconditional approach is not appropriate here because of the sampling design. wIf the table were two binomial samples, that approach gives interval ЕҪ0.4, 234.4. by inverting вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ unconditional score tests.x

3.6.3 Impact of Discreteness on Exact Confidence Intervals
Small-sample inference is вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ in the sense that the conditional distribution is free of nuisance parameters. Confidence intervals and tests use exact probability calculations rather than approximate ones. However, their operating characteristics are conservative because of discreteness.
Large-sample methods do not have the guarantee of bounds on error probabilities. They can be conservative or liberal, and thus their results can appear quite different from exact methods. For example, for the tea-tasting data ЕҪTable 3.8., the P-value for the Pearson chi-squared test equals 0.157, compared to 0.486 for the two-sided exact test. The 95% large-sample confidence interval ЕҪ3.2. for the odds ratio is ЕҪ0.4, 220.9., compared to CornfieldвҖҷs exact interval of ЕҪ0.2, 626.2.. Normally, one would prefer an exact method over an approximate one. When the conditional distribution is highly discrete, however, the choice is not so obvious. Exact methods then can be quite conservative, especially with small samples.
For highly discrete data, it seems sensible to use adjustments of exact methods based on the mid-P-value. Confidence intervals with the conditional approach then invert hypergeometric tests of вҗӘ s вҗӘ0 using the mid-P-value. Although not guaranteed to have error probabilities no greater than the

EXTENSIONS FOR MULTIWAY TABLES AND NONTABULATED RESPONSES

101

nominal level, this method usually comes closer than the exact method to the desired level. Compared to large-sample methods, it has the advantage of working well as the degree of discreteness diminishes, since it then is essentially the same as the corresponding exact method using an ordinary P-value.
Inference based on the mid-P-value compromises between the conservativeness of exact methods and the uncertain adequacy of large-sample methods. For interval estimation of the odds ratio, this method tends to be a bit conservative, but for small samples can yield much shorter intervals than the Cornfield exact interval. For the tea-tasting data, for instance, the 95% confidence interval based on inverting two one-sided hypergeometric tests using the mid-P-value is ЕҪ0.31, 309., compared to the Cornfield interval of ЕҪ0.21, 626..

3.6.4 Small-Sample Inference for Difference of Proportions
The conditional approach to eliminating nuisance parameters works when those parameters have sufficient statistics. However, weвҖҷll see ЕҪSection 6.7.9. that reduced sufficient statistics occur only for certain models. For binary data, such models must have odds ratios as parameters. For 2 = 2 tables, the conditional approach cannot yield confidence intervals for differences or ratios of proportions. The unconditional approach is more complex but does not require sufficient statistics. We used it in Section 3.5.5 for testing вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s 0 with independent binomial samples.
A small-sample confidence interval inverts the corresponding unconditional test of H0: вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s вҗҰ0, for any fixed y1 - вҗҰ0 - 1. The probability function for the table is the product of bin ЕҪ n1, вҗІ 1. and bin ЕҪ n2 , вҗІ 2 . mass functions. One can express this in terms of вҗҰ s вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 and a nuisance parameter вҗӯ. For instance, if вҗӯ s вҗІ 1 q вҗІ 2 , one substitutes вҗІ 1 s ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗҰ .r2 and вҗІ 2 s ЕҪ вҗӯ y вҗҰ .r2. For вҗҰ s вҗҰ0 and a fixed value of вҗӯ, one then uses this binomial product to calculate the probability that the test statistic is at least as large as observed. The P-value is the supremum of such probabilities calculated over all possible values for вҗӯ. This provides a family of tests for the various values of вҗҰ0. The confidence interval for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 is the set of вҗҰ0 for which this P-value exceeds вҗЈ.
This approach can be quite conservative. For details regarding various test statistics, see Agresti and Min ЕҪ2001., Coe and Tamhane ЕҪ1993., Santner and Snell ЕҪ1980., and Santner and Yamagami ЕҪ1993.. It is better to invert a single two-sided test, as in Coe and Tamhane ЕҪ1993., than to invert two separate one-sided tests.

3.7 EXTENSIONS FOR MULTIWAY TABLES AND NONTABULATED RESPONSES
The methods of this chapter extend to multiway contingency tables. For instance, tests of independence for two-way tables extend to tests of condi-

102

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

tional independence in three-way tables. In future chapters we present such methods with models that provide a basis for defining relevant parameters and their statistical inferences. The methods then apply in a greater variety of situations, such as when some explanatory variables are continuous rather than categorical.

3.7.1 Categorical Data Need Not Be Contingency Tables
Examples so far have presented categorical data in the format of contingency tables. However, this book has broader focus than contingency table analysis. Models for categorical response variables can have continuous as well as categorical explanatory variables. Even when all or most variables are categorical, source data files are not usually contingency tables but have the form of a line of data for each subject. The first three lines in a data file containing responses of a survey of subjects measuring gender, race, education ЕҪ1 s less than high school, 2 s high school or some college, 3 s college graduate., and opinion about homosexuality ЕҪ1 s tolerant, 2 s homophobic. might be:

subject gender

race

education

opinion

1

f

w

2

1

2

m

b

3

1

3

m

w

1

2

Software can read data files of this type and then conduct analyses that may involve forming contingency tables.
In the next chapter we introduce the modeling framework used in the rest of the book. All the methods that weвҖҷve studied in this chapter result from inferences for parameters in simple versions of these models.

NOTES
Section 3.1: Confidence InterВ©als for Association Parameters
3.1. Adaptations of WoolfвҖҷs interval ЕҪ3.2. for logвҗӘ to handle zero cell counts include Agresti ЕҪ1999. and Gart ЕҪ1966, 1971.. Goodman ЕҪ1964a. presented simultaneous confidence intervals for all odds ratios in an I = J table. Brown and Benedetti ЕҪ1977. and Goodman and Kruskal ЕҪ1963, 1972. provided standard errors for many association measures. Goodman and Kruskal ЕҪ1963, 1972. extended ЕҪ3.9. for independent multinomial sampling.
3.2. Agresti and Caffo ЕҪ2000. showed that as in the single-sample case ЕҪProblem 1.24., the Wald interval ЕҪ3.4. for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 behaves much better after adding two pseudo-observations of each type ЕҪone of each type in each sample..

NOTES

103

Section 3.2: Testing Independence in Two-Way Contingency Tables

3.3. For hypergeometric sampling, Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j4 in tests of independence are exact ЕҪrather than
estimated. expected values. Specifically,

E ЕҪ n11 . s n1q nq1
n

and varЕҪ n11 . s n2 n1qnq1 n2qnq2 ЕҪ n y 1. .

Haldane ЕҪ1940. derived EЕҪ X 2 . s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.nrЕҪ n y 1. and a complex formula for var ЕҪ X 2 .; Dawson ЕҪ1954. provided a simplified expression. Lewis et al. ЕҪ1984. derived the third central moment. Watson ЕҪ1959. showed that the conditional distribution of X 2 also has the limiting chi-squared distribution. 3.4. Diaconis and Efron ЕҪ1985. presented inference based on a uniform distribution over all possible tables of the same I, J, and n; their В®olume test considers the proportion of such tables having X 2 F Xo2.
3.5. Specialized methods are necessary for complex sampling designs. Sequential methods are useful in biomedical applications ЕҪJennison and Turnbull 2000, Chap. 12.. Social science applications often incorporate clustering andror stratification. LaVange et al. ЕҪ2001. and Rao and Thomas ЕҪ1988. surveyed analyses of categorical data for complex sampling methods. Gleser and Moore ЕҪ1985. showed that positive dependence causes null distributions of Pearson statistics to stochastically increase. See also Bedrick ЕҪ1983., Clogg and Eliason ЕҪ1987., Fay ЕҪ1985., Holt et al. ЕҪ1980., Koehler and Wilson ЕҪ1986., Rao and Scott ЕҪ1987., Scott and Wild ЕҪ2001., Shuster and Downing ЕҪ1976.,
TavarВҙe and Altham ЕҪ1983., and methods of Chapter 12.
Other modifications are necessary when some data are missing. Watson ЕҪ1956. was perhaps the first to study this. Lipsitz and Fitzmaurice ЕҪ1996. derived score tests of independence and conditional independence for contingency tables, assuming ignorable nonresponse, and showed that the test statistics have the usual asymptotic chi-squared null distributions. See Schafer ЕҪ1997, Chap. 7. for a survey of methods.

Section 3.4: Two-Way Tables with Ordered Classifications
3.6. Bhapkar ЕҪ1968. and Yates ЕҪ1948. proposed statistics similar to M 2 and also proposed statistics for singly-ordered tables. Graubard and Korn ЕҪ1987. listed 14 tests for 2 = J tables that utilize a correlation-type statistic. See also Nair ЕҪ1987. and Williams ЕҪ1952.. Cohen and Sackrowitz ЕҪ1991, 1992. evaluated decision-theoretic aspects, such as admissibility, of tests based on gamma and local log odds ratios. Rayner and Best ЕҪ2001. considered nonparametrics methods in a contingency table format.

Section 3.5: Small-Sample Tests of Independence

3.7. Yates ЕҪ1934. mentioned that Fisher suggested the hypergeometric to him for an exact test. He proposed a continuity-corrected version of X 2,

ГҪГҪ 2
Xc

s

ЕҪ < ni j y вҗ®ЛҶi j < y 0.5. 2
,
вҗ®ЛҶi j

to approximate the exact test. Haber ЕҪ1980, 1982., Plackett ЕҪ1964., and Yates ЕҪ1984. discussed its appropriateness. Since software now makes FisherвҖҷs exact test feasible even with large samples, this correction is no longer needed.

104

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

3.8. The UMPU property of FisherвҖҷs exact test follows from conditioning on a sufficient statistic that is complete and has distribution in the exponential family ЕҪLehmann 1986, Secs. 4.5бҺҗ4.7.. Fleiss ЕҪ1981., Gail and Gart ЕҪ1973., and Suissa and Shuster ЕҪ1985. studied sample size for obtaining fixed power in FisherвҖҷs test. The controversy over conditioning includes Barnard ЕҪ1945, 1947, 1949, 1979., Berkson ЕҪ1978., Fisher ЕҪ1956., Howard ЕҪ1998., Kempthorne ЕҪ1979., Lloyd ЕҪ1988a., Pearson ЕҪ1947., Rice ЕҪ1988., Routledge ЕҪ1992., Suissa and Shuster ЕҪ1984, 1985., and Yates ЕҪ1984.. Yates and discussants also addressed the choice of two-sided P-value. Discussion of unconditional
methods includes Chan ЕҪ1998., MartВҙДұn AndrВҙes and Silva Mato ЕҪ1994., and RoЦҖ hmel and
Mansmann ЕҪ1999.. Altham ЕҪ1969. and Howard ЕҪ1998. discussed Bayesian analyses for 2 = 2 tables ЕҪsee Section 15.2.3.. Agresti ЕҪ1992, 2001. surveyed small-sample methods. 3.9. For discussion of inference using the mid-P-value, see Berry and Armitage ЕҪ1995., Hirji ЕҪ1991., Hwang and Wells ЕҪ2002., Hwang and Yang ЕҪ2001., Mehta and Walsh ЕҪ1992., and Routledge ЕҪ1994.. Similar benefits can accrue from alternative proposed P-values. One approach, useful when several tables have the same value for a test statistic, uses the table probability to create a more finely partitioned sample space; for tables having the observed test statistic value, only those contribute to the P-value that are no more likely than the observed table ЕҪCohen and Sackrowitz 1992; Kim and Agresti 1995.. This depends on more than the sufficient statistic, and in some cases a RaoбҺҗBlackwellized version is the mid-P-value ЕҪHwang and Wells 2002.. Ordinary P-values obtained with higher-order asymptotic methods without continuity corrections for discreteness yield performance similar to that of the mid-P-value ЕҪPierce and Peters 1999; Strawderman and Wells 1998.. 3.10. For exact treatment of I = J tables, see Mehta and Patel ЕҪ1983.. For ordered categories, see also Agresti et al. ЕҪ1990.. For Monte Carlo estimation of exact P-values, see Agresti et al. ЕҪ1979., Booth and Butler ЕҪ1999., Diaconis and Sturmfels ЕҪ1998., Forster et al. ЕҪ1996., Mehta et al. ЕҪ1988., and Patefield ЕҪ1982.. Gail and Mantel ЕҪ1977. and Good ЕҪ1976. gave approximate formulas for the number of tables having certain fixed margins. Freidlin and Gastwirth ЕҪ1999. extended the unconditional approach to a test for trend in I = 2 tables and a test of conditional independence with several 2 = 2 tables.

Section 3.6: Small-Sample Confidence InterВ©als for 2 = 2 Tables

3.11.

Suppose that ЕҪвҗӘ , вҗӯ. has minimal sufficient statistic ЕҪT, U ., where вҗӯ is a nuisance parameter. Cox and Hinkley ЕҪ1974, p. 35. defined U to be ancillary for вҗӘ if its distribution depends only on вҗӯ, and the distribution of T given U depends only on вҗӘ. For 2 = 2 tables with odds ratio вҗӘ and вҗӯ s ЕҪвҗІ 1q,вҗІq1 ., let T s n11 and U s ЕҪ n1q, nq1 .. Then U is not ancillary, because its distribution depends on вҗӘ as well as вҗӯ. Using a definition due to Godambe, Bhapkar ЕҪ1989. referred to the marginals U as partial ancillary for вҗӘ. This means that the distribution of the data, given U, depends only on вҗӘ , and that for fixed вҗӘ , the family of distributions of U for various вҗӯ is complete. Liang ЕҪ1984. gave an alternative definition referring to conditional and
unconditional inference being equally efficient.

PROBLEMS
Applications
3.1 Refer to Table 2.9. Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval for the population ЕҪa. odds ratio, ЕҪb. difference of proportions, and ЕҪc. relative risk between seat-belt use and type of injury.

PROBLEMS

105

3.2 Refer to Table 2.5 on lung cancer and smoking. Construct a confidence interval for a relevant measure of association. Interpret.

3.3 In professional basketball games during 1980бҺҗ1982, when Larry Bird of the Boston Celtics shot a pair of free throws, 5 times he missed both, 251 times he made both, 34 times he made only the first, and 48 times he made only the second ЕҪWardrop 1995.. Is it plausible that the successive free throws are independent?

3.4 Refer to Table 3.10. a. Using X 2 and G2, test the hypothesis of independence between party identification and race. Report the P-values and interpret.
b. Use residuals to describe the evidence of association.
c. Partition chi-squared into components regarding the choice between Democrat and Independent and between these two combined and Republican. Interpret.
d. Summarize association by constructing a 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio between race and whether a Democrat or Republican. Interpret.

TABLE 3.10 Data for Problem 3.4

Race

Party Identification Democrat Independent Republican

Black

103

15

11

White

341

105

405

Source: 1991 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

3.5 Refer to Table 3.10. In the same survey, gender was cross-classified with party identification. Table 3.11 shows some results. Explain how to interpret all the results on this printout.
3.6 In a study of the relationship between stage of breast cancer at diagnosis ЕҪlocal or advanced. and a womanвҖҷs living arrangement, of 144 women living alone, 41.0% had an advanced case; of 209 living with spouse, 52.2% were advanced; of 89 living with others, 59.6% were advanced. The authors reported the P-value for the relationship as 0.02 ЕҪD. J. Moritz and W. A. Satariano, J. Clin. Epidemiol. 46: 443бҺҗ454, 1993.. Reconstruct the analysis performed to obtain this P-value.

106

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 3.11 Results for Problem 3.5

Frequency Expected female
male

dem
279 261.42
165 182.58

indep
73 70.653
47 49.347

repub
225 244.93
191 171.07

Statistic

DF

Chi- Square

2

Likelihood Ratio Chi- Square 2

Value
7.0095 7.0026

Prob
0.0301 0.0302

Observ 1 2 3

Resraw 17.584
2.347 y19.931

Reschi 1.088 0.279
y1.274

StReschi 2.293 0.465
y2.618

Observ 4 5 6

Resraw y17.584
y2.347 19.931

Reschi y1.301 y0.334
1.524

StReschi y2.293 y0.464 2.618

3.7 Refer to Table 2.1. Partition G2 for testing whether the incidence of heart attacks is independent of aspirin intake into two components. Interpret.
3.8 Project Blue Book: Analysis of Reports of Unidentified Aerial Objects was published by the U.S. Air Force ЕҪAir Technical Intelligence Center at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. in May 1955 to analyze reports of unidentified flying objects ЕҪUFOs.. In its Table II, the report classified 1765 sightings later regarded as known objects and 434 sightings later regarded as unknown, according to the object color ЕҪnine categories.. The report states: вҖҳвҖҳThe chi-square test is applicable only to distributions which have the same number of elements,вҖҷвҖҷ so the investigators multiplied all counts in the known category by ЕҪ434r1765., so each row has 434 observations, before computing X 2. They reported X 2 s 26.15 with df s 8. Explain why this is incorrect. What should X 2 equal? ЕҪ Hint: For their adjusted table, first show that the contribution to X 2 is the same for each cell in a column, and then show the effect on those contributions of multiplying each count in one row by a constant..
3.9 Table 3.12 classifies a sample of psychiatric patients by their diagnosis and by whether their treatment prescribed drugs. a. Obtain standardized Pearson residuals for independence, and interpret. b. Partition chi-squared into three components to describe differences and similarities among the diagnoses, by comparing ЕҪi. the first two rows, ЕҪii. the third and fourth rows, and ЕҪiii. the last row to the first and second rows combined and the third and fourth rows combined.

PROBLEMS

107

TABLE 3.12 Data for Problem 3.9

Diagnosis

Drugs

No Drugs

Schizophrenia

105

8

Affective disorder

12

2

Neurosis

18

19

Personality disorder

47

52

Special symptoms

0

13

Source: Reprinted with permission from E. Helmes and G. C. Fekken, J. Clin. Psychol. 42: 569бҺҗ576 ЕҪ1986..

3.10 Refer to Table 7.8. For the combined data for the two genders, yielding a single 4 = 4 table, X 2 s 11.5 ЕҪ P s 0.24., whereas using row scores ЕҪ3, 10, 20, 35. and column scores ЕҪ1, 3, 4, 5., M 2 s 7.04 ЕҪ P s 0.008.. Explain why the results are so different.
3.11 A study on educational aspirations of high school students ЕҪS. Crysdale, Internat. J. Compar. Sociol. 16: 19бҺҗ36, 1975. measured aspirations with the scale ЕҪsome high school, high school graduate, some college, college graduate.. The student counts in these categories were ЕҪ11, 52, 23, 22. when family income was low, ЕҪ9, 44, 13, 10. when family income was middle, and ЕҪ9, 41, 12, 27. when family income was high. a. Test independence of educational aspirations and family income using X 2 or G2. Explain the deficiency of this test for these data. b. Find the standardized Pearson residuals. Do they suggest any association pattern? c. Conduct an alternative test that may be more powerful. Interpret.
3.12 Refer to Table 8.15. Obtain a 95% confidence interval for gamma. Interpret the association between schooling and attitude toward abortion.
3.13 Table 3.13 shows the results of a retrospective study comparing radiation therapy with surgery in treating cancer of the larynx. The response

TABLE 3.13 Data for Problem 3.13

Cancer Controlled

Cancer Not Controlled

Surgery

21

2

Radiation therapy

15

3

Source: Reprinted with permission from W. M. Mendenhall, R. R. Million, D. E. Sharkey, and N. J. Cassisi, Internat. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 10: 357бҺҗ363 ЕҪ1984., Pergamon Press plc.

108

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 3.14 SAS Output for Problem 3.13
FisherвҖҷs Exact Test
Cell (1,1) Frequency (F) Left- sided Pr <= F Right- sided Pr >= F Table Probability (P) Two- sided Pr<= P

21 0.8947 0.3808 0.2755 0.6384

Odds Ratio Asymptotic Conf Limits: Exact Conf Limits:

2.1000

95% Lower Conf Limit 95% Upper Conf Limit 95% Lower Conf Limit 95% Upper Conf Limit

0.3116 14.1523 0.2089 27.5522

indicates whether the cancer was controlled for at least two years following treatment. Table 3.14 shows SAS output. a. Report and interpret the P-value for FisherвҖҷs exact test with ЕҪi. Ha:
вҗӘ ) 1, and ЕҪii. Ha: вҗӘ / 1. Explain how the P-values are calculated. b. Interpret the confidence intervals for вҗӘ. Explain the difference
between them and how they were calculated. c. Find and interpret the one-sided mid-P-value. Give advantages and
disadvantages of this type of P-value.
3.14 A study considered the effect of prednisolone on severe hypercalcaemia in women with metastatic breast cancer ЕҪB. Kristensen et al., J. Intern. Med. 232: 237бҺҗ245, 1992.. Of 30 patients, 15 were randomly selected to receive prednisolone. The other 15 formed a control group. Normalization in their level of serum-ionized calcium was achieved by 7 of the treated patients and none of the control group. Analyze whether results were significantly better for treatment than for control. Interpret.
3.15 For Problem 3.14, obtain a 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio using ЕҪa. the Woolf ЕҪi.e., Wald. interval, ЕҪb. CornfieldвҖҷs вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ approach, ЕҪc. the profile likelihood. In each case, note the effect of the zero cell count. Summarize advantages and disadvantages of each approach.
3.16 Refer to the tea-tasting data ЕҪTable 3.8.. Construct the null distributions of the ordinary P-value and the mid-P-value for FisherвҖҷs exact test with Ha: вҗӘ ) 1. Find and compare their expected values.

PROBLEMS

109

3.17 Consider a 3 = 3 table having entries, by row, of ЕҪ4, 2, 0 r 2, 2, 2 r 0, 2, 4.. Conduct an exact test of independence, using X 2. Assuming ordered rows and columns and using equally spaced scores, conduct an ordinal exact test. Explain why results differ so much.

3.18 An advertisement by Schering Corp. in 1999 for the allergy drug Claritin mentioned that in a pediatric randomized clinical trial, symptoms of nervousness were shown by 4 of 188 patients on loratadine ЕҪClaritin., 2 of 262 patients taking placebo, and 2 of 170 patients on choropheniramine. In each part below, explain which method you used, and why.
a. Is there inferential evidence that nervousness depends on drug?
b. For the Claritin and placebo groups, construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval for the ЕҪi. odds ratio and ЕҪii. difference of proportions suffering nervousness.

3.19 Refer to Problem 2.19 on sexual fun. Analyze these data. Present a short report summarizing results and interpretations.

Theory and Methods
3.20 Is вҗӘЛҶ the midpoint of large- and small-sample confidence intervals for
вҗӘ ? Why or why not?
3.21 For comparing two binomial samples, show that the standard error ЕҪ3.1. of a log odds ratio increases as the absolute difference of proportions of successes and failures for a given sample increases.
3.22 Using the delta method, show that the Wald confidence interval for the logit of a binomial parameter вҗІ is
log вҗІЛҶrЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . " zвҗЈr2r'nвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . .
Explain how to use this interval to obtain one for вҗІ itself. wNewcombe ЕҪ2001. noted that the sample logit is also the midpoint of the score interval for вҗІ , on the logit scale. He showed that this logit interval contains the score interval.x
3.23 For two parameters, a confidence interval for вҗӘ1 y вҗӘ2 based on
single-sample estimate вҗӘЛҶi and interval ЕҪ li, ui. for вҗӘi, i s 1, 2, is
Еҫ ' ' / вҗӘЛҶ1 y вҗӘЛҶ2 y ЕҪвҗӘЛҶ1 y l1. q 2 ЕҪ u2 y вҗӘЛҶ2 .2 , вҗӘЛҶ1 y вҗӘЛҶ2 q ЕҪ u1 y вҗӘЛҶ1. q 2 ЕҪвҗӘЛҶ2 y l2 .2 .

110

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

Newcombe ЕҪ1998b. proposed an interval for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 using the score
interval ЕҪli, ui. for вҗІi that performs much better than the Wald interval
ЕҪ3.4.. It is ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 y zвҗЈ r2 sL, вҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 q zвҗЈ r2 sU ., with

)sL s

l1ЕҪ1 y l1. u2ЕҪ1 y u2.

q

,

n1

n2

)sU s

u1ЕҪ1 y u1. l2 ЕҪ1 y l2 .

q

.

n1

n2

Show that it has the general form above of an interval for вҗӘ1 y вҗӘ2.
3.24 For multinomial sampling, use the asymptotic variance of log вҗӘЛҶ to
show that for YuleвҖҷs Q ЕҪProblem 3.26. the asymptotic variance of
'n ЕҪQЛҶ y Q. is вҗҙ 2 s ЕҪГқiГқjвҗІi jy1 .ЕҪ1 y Q2 .2r4 ЕҪYule 1900, 1912..
3.25 Refer to Problem 2.23. For multinomial sampling, show how to obtain a confidence interval for AR by first finding one for logЕҪ1 y AR. ЕҪFleiss 1981, p. 76..
3.26 For multinomial probabilities вҗІ s ЕҪвҗІ 1, вҗІ 2 , . . . . with a contingency table of arbitrary dimensions, suppose that a measure gЕҪ вҗІ. s вҗҜrвҗҰ.
Show that the asymptotic variance of 'n w gЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y gЕҪ вҗІ.x is вҗҙ 2 s
wГқiвҗІ iвҗ©i2 y ЕҪГқiвҗІ iвҗ©i.2 xrвҗҰ 4, where вҗ©i s вҗҰ ЕҪСЁвҗҜrСЁвҗІ i. y вҗҜ ЕҪСЁвҗҰrСЁвҗІ i. ЕҪGoodman and Kruskal, 1972.. 3.27 For ordinal variables, consider gamma ЕҪ2.14.. Let

вҗІ i jЕҪc. s Гқ Гқ вҗІab q Гқ Гқ вҗІab ,

a-i b-j

a)i b)j

вҗІ i jЕҪd. s Гқ Гқ вҗІab q Гқ Гқ вҗІab ,

a-i b)j

a)i b-j

where i and j are fixed in the summations. Show that вҢё c s ГқiГқjвҗІi jвҗІi jЕҪc. and вҢё d s ГқiГқjвҗІ i jвҗІ i jЕҪd.. Use the delta method to show that the large-
sample normality ЕҪ3.9. applies for вҗҘЛҶ, with ЕҪGoodman and Kruskal
1963.

вҗҫi j s 4 вҢё dвҗІ i jЕҪc. y вҢё cвҗІ i jЕҪ d. rЕҪ вҢё c q вҢё d . 2 ,

Гқ Гқ вҗІijвҗҫij s 0 ,
ij

вҗҙ2s

4 16 Гқ Гқ вҗІ i j вҢё dвҗІ iЕҪjc. y вҢё cвҗІ iЕҪjd. 2 .

ЕҪвҢёc q вҢёd. i j

PROBLEMS

111

3.28 An I = J table has ordered columns and unordered rows. Ridits ЕҪBross 1958. are data-based column scores. The jth sample ridit is the average cumulative proportion within category j,

Еҫ / jy1

1

ЛҶrj s Гқ pqk q

pqj .

ks1

2

The sample mean ridit in row i is RЛҶi s ГқjЛҶrj pj<i. Show that Гқj pqj ЛҶrj s 0.50 and Гқi piqRЛҶi s 0.50. wFor ridit analyses, see Agresti ЕҪ1984, Secs.
9.3 and 10.2., Bross ЕҪ1958., Fleiss ЕҪ1981, Sec. 9.4., and Landis et al. ЕҪ1978..x
3.29 Show that X 2 s nГқГқЕҪ pi j y piqpqj .2rpiqpqj . Thus, X 2 can be large when n is large, regardless of whether the association is practically important. Explain why this test, like other tests, simply indicates the degree of evidence against H0 and does not describe strength of association. ЕҪвҖҳвҖҳLike fire, the chi-square test is an excellent servant and a bad master,вҖҷвҖҷ Sir Austin Bradford Hill, Proc. Roy. Soc. Med. 58: 295бҺҗ300, 1965..
3.30 For testing H0: вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 using independent binomial variates y1 and y2 with n1 and n2 trials, the score statistic is

вҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2
z s 'вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . ЕҪ1rn1 q 1rn2 . ,

where вҗІЛҶ s ЕҪ y1 q y2 .rЕҪ n1 q n2 . is the pooled estimate of вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2
under H0. Show that z 2 s X 2.
3.31 For a 2 = 2 table, consider H0: вҗІ 11 s вҗӘ 2, вҗІ 12 s вҗІ 21 s вҗӘ ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ ., вҗІ 22 s ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ .2. a. Show that the marginal distributions are identical and that independence holds.
b. For a multinomial sample, under H0 show that вҗӘЛҶs ЕҪ p1qq pq1 .r2.
c. Explain how to test H0. Show that df s 2 for the test statistic. d. Refer to Problem 3.3. Are Larry BirdвҖҷs pairs of free throws plausibly
independent and identically distributed?
3.32 For a 2 = 2 table, show that: a. The four Pearson residuals may take different values.

112

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

b. All four standardized Pearson residuals have the same absolute value. ЕҪThis is sensible, since df s 1..
c. The square of each standardized Pearson residual equals X 2. w Note: X 2 s nЕҪ n11 n22 y n12 n21 .2rЕҪ n1qn2qnq1 nq2 . for 2 = 2 tables. See Mirkin ЕҪ2001. for alternative X 2 formulas for I = J tables.x

3.33 For testing independence, show that X 2 F n minЕҪ I y 1, J y 1.. Hence
V 2 s X 2rw nminЕҪ I y 1, J y 1.x falls between 0 and 1 ЕҪCramВҙer 1946..
For 2 = 2 tables, X 2rn is often called phi-squared; it equals Goodman and KruskalвҖҷs tau ЕҪProblem 2.38.. Other measures based on X 2 include the contingency coefficient w X 2rЕҪ X 2 q n.x1r2 ЕҪPearson 1904..

3.34 For counts Г„ni4, the power diВ®ergence statistic for testing goodness of fit ЕҪCressie and Read 1984; Read and Cressie 1988. is

ГҪ 2
вҗӯЕҪ вҗӯ q 1.

ni ЕҪ nirвҗ®ЛҶi . вҗӯ y 1

for yПұ - вҗӯ - Пұ.

a. For вҗӯ s 1, show that this equals X 2. b. As вҗӯ в„ў 0, show that it converges to G2. w Hint: log t s lim hв„ў 0
ЕҪt h y 1.rh.x
c. As вҗӯ в„ў y1, show that it converges to 2Гқ вҗ®ЛҶi logЕҪвҗ®ЛҶirni., the mini-
mum discrimination information statistic ЕҪGokhale and Kullback 1978..
d. For вҗӯ s y2, show that it equals ГқЕҪ ni y вҗ®ЛҶi.2rni, the Neyman
modified chi-squared statistic ЕҪNeyman 1949..
e. For вҗӯ s y 21 , show that it equals 4ГқЕҪ'ni y 'вҗ®ЛҶi .2, the
FreemanбҺҗTukey statistic ЕҪFreeman and Tukey 1950..
wUnder regularity conditions, their asymptotic distributions are identical ЕҪsee Drost et al. 1989.. The chi-squared null approximation works best for вҗӯ near 23 .x
3.35 Use a partitioning argument to explain why G2 for testing independence cannot increase after combining two rows ЕҪor two columns. of a contingency table. ЕҪ Hint: Argue that G2 for full table s G2 for collapsed table q G2 for table of the two rows that are combined in the collapsed table..

PROBLEMS

113

3.36 Motivate partitioning ЕҪ3.14. by showing that the multiple hypergeometric distribution ЕҪ3.19. for Г„ni j4 factors as the product of hypergeometric distributions for the separate component tables ЕҪLancaster, 1949..

3.37 Explain why Г„ nqj4 are sufficient for Г„вҗІqj4 in ЕҪ3.17..

3.38 Assume independence, and let pi j s ni jrn and вҗІЛҶi j s piqpqj. a. Show that pi j and вҗІЛҶi j are unbiased for вҗІ i j s вҗІ iqвҗІqj.
b. Show that varЕҪ pi j. s вҗІ iqвҗІqj ЕҪ1 y вҗІ iqвҗІqj .rn. c. Using EЕҪ piqpqj .2 s EЕҪ pi2q. EЕҪ p2qj . and EЕҪ p2iq. s var ЕҪ piq. q
w EЕҪ piq.x2, show that

varЕҪвҗІЛҶi j . s Г„вҗІiqвҗІqj вҗІiq ЕҪ1 y вҗІqj . q вҗІqj ЕҪ1 y вҗІiq. 4 n
q вҗІ iq ЕҪ1 y вҗІ iq . вҗІqj ЕҪ1 y вҗІqj .rn2 .

d. As n в„ў Пұ, show that lim varЕҪ'n вҗІЛҶi j. F lim varЕҪ'n pi j., with equality
only if вҗІi j s 1 or 0. Hence, if the model holds or if it nearly holds, the model estimator is better than the sample proportion.
3.39 Show that the sample value of the uncertainty coefficient ЕҪ2.13. satis-
fies UЛҶ s yG2r2 nЕҪГқ pqj log pqj .. wHaberman ЕҪ1982. gave its standard
error.x

3.40 When a test statistic has a continuous distribution, the P-value has a null uniform distribution, PЕҪ P-value F вҗЈ . s вҗЈ for 0 - вҗЈ - 1. For FisherвҖҷs exact test, explain why under the null, PЕҪ P-value F вҗЈ . F вҗЈ for 0 - вҗЈ - 1. ЕҪ Hint: P ЕҪ P-value F вҗЈ . s Ew P ЕҪ P-value F вҗЈ < n1q, nq1 , n.x..

3.41 Refer to Note 3.3 about moments of the hypergeometric distribution ЕҪ3.16.. Letting вҗі s nq1rn, show that n11 has the same mean as a binomial random variable for n1q trials with success probability вҗі, and that it has its variance multiplied by a finite population correction factor ЕҪ n y n1q.rЕҪ n y 1.. ЕҪThe hypergeometric is similar to the binomial when n1q is small compared to n..

3.42 A contingency table for two independent binomial variables has counts

ЕҪ3, 0 r 0, 3. by row. For H0: вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 and Ha: вҗІ 1 ) вҗІ 2 , show that the

P-value

equals

1 64

for

the

exact

unconditional

test

and

1 20

for

FisherвҖҷs

114

INFERENCE FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

exact test. wFor discussion of this example, see Little ЕҪ1989., G. BarnardвҖҷs remarks at the end of Yates ЕҪ1984., and Sprott ЕҪ2000, Sec. 6.4.4..x

3.43 Refer to Problem 3.42 and exact tests using X 2 with Ha: вҗІ 1 / вҗІ 2. Explain why the unconditional P-value, evaluated at вҗІ s 0.5, is related to Fisher conditional P-values for various tables by

6
P ЕҪ X 2 G 6. s Гқ P ЕҪ X 2 G 6 < nq1 s k . P ЕҪ nq1 s k . .
ks0

Thus,

the

unconditional

P-value of

1 32

is

a

weighted

average

of the

Fisher P-value for the observed column margins and P-values of 0

Еҫ / corresponding to the impossibility of getting results as extreme as

observed if other margins had occurred ЕҪi.e., 321 s 0.10

6 ЕҪ1r2. 6 ..
3

The Fisher quote in Section 3.5.6 gave his view about this.

3.44 Consider exact tests of independence, given the marginals, for the I = I table having nii s 1 for i s 1, . . . , I, and ni j s 0 otherwise. Show that ЕҪa. tests that order tables by their probabilities, X 2, or G2 have P-value s 1.0, and ЕҪb. the one-sided test that orders tables by an ordinal statistic such as r or C y D has P-value s ЕҪ1rI!..

3.45 A Monte Carlo scheme randomly samples M separate I = J tables

having the observed margins to approximate Po s PЕҪ X 2 G Xo2 . for an

exact test. Let PЛҶ be the sample proportion of the M tables with

X 2 G Xo2. Show that PЕҪ< PЛҶy Po < F B. s 1 y вҗЈ requires that M f

2
zвҗЈ

r2

PoЕҪ1

y

Po

.rB

2.

3.46 Show that the conditional ML estimate of вҗӘ satisfies n11 s EЕҪ n11. for distribution ЕҪ3.18..

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 4
Introduction to Generalized Linear Models
In Chapters 2 and 3 we focused on methods for two-way contingency tables. Most studies, however, have several explanatory variables, and they may be continuous as well as categorical. The goal is usually to describe their effects on response variables. Modeling the effects helps us do this efficiently. A good-fitting model evaluates effects, includes relevant interactions, and provides smoothed estimates of response probabilities.
The rest of the book focuses on model building for categorical response variables. In this chapter we introduce a family of generalized linear models that contains the most important models for categorical responses as well as standard models for continuous responses. Section 4.1 covers three components common to all generalized linear models. Section 4.2 illustrates with models for binary responses. The most important case is logistic regression, a linear model for the logit transformation of a binomial parameter. In Chapters 5 through 7 we study these models in detail.
In Section 4.3 we present generalized linear models for counts. A Poisson regression model called a loglinear model is a linear model for the log of a Poisson mean. In Chapters 8 and 9 we study them for modeling counts in contingency tables.
Sections 4.4 through 4.8 are more technical. Readers wanting mainly an overview of methods can skip them or read them lightly. For generalized linear models, Section 4.4 covers likelihood equations and the asymptotic covariance matrix of ML model parameter estimates, and Section 4.5 summarizes inferential methods. Methods of solving the likelihood equations are presented in Section 4.6. In the final two sections we introduce generalizations, quasi-likelihood and generalized additiВ®e models, that further extend the scope of models.
115

116

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

4.1 GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL
Generalized linear models ЕҪGLMs. extend ordinary regression models to encompass nonnormal response distributions and modeling functions of the mean. Three components specify a generalized linear model: A random component identifies the response variable Y and its probability distribution; a systematic component specifies explanatory variables used in a linear predictor function; and a link function specifies the function of EЕҪY . that the model equates to the systematic component. Nelder and Wedderburn ЕҪ1972. introduced the class of GLMs, although many models in the class were well established by then.

4.1.1 Components of Generalized Linear Models
The random component of a GLM consists of a response variable Y with independent observations ЕҪ y1, . . . , yN . from a distribution in the natural exponential family. This family has probability density function or mass function of form

f ЕҪ yi ; вҗӘi . s aЕҪ вҗӘi . bЕҪ yi . exp yi QЕҪ вҗӘi . .

ЕҪ 4 .1.

Several important distributions are special cases, including the Poisson and binomial. The value of the parameter вҗӘi may vary for i s 1, . . . , N, depending on values of explanatory variables. The term QЕҪвҗӘ . is called the natural
parameter. In Section 4.4 we present a more general formula that also has a dispersion parameter, but ЕҪ4.1. is sufficient for basic discrete data models.
The systematic component of a GLM relates a vector ЕҪвҗ©1, . . . , вҗ©N . to the explanatory variables through a linear model. Let xi j denote the value of predictor j ЕҪ j s 1, 2, . . . , p. for subject i. Then

вҗ©i s Гқ вҗӨj xi j ,
j

i s 1, . . . , N.

This linear combination of explanatory variables is called the linear predictor. Usually, one xi j s 1 for all i, for the coefficient of an intercept ЕҪoften denoted by вҗЈ . in the model.
The third component of a GLM is a link function that connects the random and systematic components. Let вҗ®i s EЕҪYi., i s 1, . . . , N. The model links вҗ®i to вҗ©i by вҗ©i s gЕҪвҗ®i., where the link function g is a monotonic, differentiable function. Thus, g links EЕҪYi. to explanatory variables through the formula

g ЕҪ вҗ®i . s Гқ вҗӨj xi j ,
j

i s 1, . . . , N.

ЕҪ 4 .2.

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL

117

The link function gЕҪвҗ®. s вҗ®, called the identity link, has вҗ©i s вҗ®i. It specifies a linear model for the mean itself. This is the link function for ordinary regression with normally distributed Y. The link function that transforms the mean to the natural parameter is called the canonical link. For it, gЕҪвҗ®i. s QЕҪвҗӘi., and QЕҪвҗӘi. s Гқj вҗӨj xi j. The following subsections show examples.
In summary, a GLM is a linear model for a transformed mean of a response variable that has distribution in the natural exponential family. We now illustrate the three components by introducing the key GLMs for discrete response variables.

4.1.2 Binomial Logit Models for Binary Data
Many response variables are binary. Represent the success and failure outcomes by 1 and 0. The Bernoulli distribution for this Bernoulli trial specifies probabilities PЕҪY s 1. s вҗІ and PЕҪY s 0. s 1 y вҗІ , for which EЕҪY . s вҗІ . This is the special case of the binomial ЕҪ1.1. with n s 1. The probability mass function is

f ЕҪ y ; вҗІ . s вҗІ y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . 1yy s ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . вҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ . y

Еҫ / s ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . exp y log вҗІ 1yвҗІ

ЕҪ 4 .3.

for y s 0 and 1. This is in the natural exponential family ЕҪ4.1., identifying вҗӘ with вҗІ , aЕҪвҗІ . s 1 y вҗІ , bЕҪ y. s 1, and QЕҪвҗІ . s logwвҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ .x. The natural parameter logwвҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ .x is the log odds of response 1, the logit of вҗІ . This is the canonical link. GLMs using the logit link are often called logit models.

4.1.3 Poisson Loglinear Models for Count Data

Some response variables have counts as their possible outcomes. For a sample of silicon wafers used in manufacturing computer chips, each observation might be the number of imperfections on a wafer. Counts also occur as entries in contingency tables.
The simplest distribution for count data is the Poisson. Like counts, Poisson variates can take any nonnegative integer value. Let Y denote a count and let вҗ® s EЕҪY .. The Poisson probability mass function ЕҪ1.4. for Y is

Еҫ / yвҗ® y
eвҗ®

1

fЕҪ y; вҗ®. s

s expЕҪyвҗ®.

expЕҪ y log вҗ®. ,

y!

y!

y s 0, 1, 2, . . . .

This has natural exponential form ЕҪ4.1. with вҗӘ s вҗ®, aЕҪвҗ®. s exp ЕҪyвҗ®., bЕҪ y. s 1ry!, and QЕҪвҗ®. s log вҗ®. The natural parameter is log вҗ®, so the canonical

118

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

TABLE 4.1 Types of Generalized Linear Models for Statistical Analysis

Random

Systematic

Component

Link

Component

Model

Chapters

Normal Normal Normal Binomial Poisson Multinomial

Identity Identity Identity Logit Log Generalized
logit

Continuous Categorical Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed

Regression Analysis of variance Analysis of covariance Logistic regression Loglinear Multinomial response

5 and 6 8 and 9 7

link function is the log link, вҗ© s log вҗ®. The model using this link is

log вҗ®i s Гқ вҗӨj xi j ,
j

i s 1, . . . , N.

ЕҪ 4 .4.

This model is called a Poisson loglinear model.

4.1.4 Generalized Linear Models for Continuous Responses
The class of GLMs also includes models for continuous responses. The normal distribution is in a natural exponential family that includes dispersion parameters. Its natural parameter is the mean. Therefore, an ordinary regression model for EЕҪY . is a GLM using the identity link. Table 4.1 lists this and other standard models for a normal random component. The table also lists GLMs for discrete responses that are presented in the next six chapters.
A traditional way to analyze data transforms Y so that it has approximately a normal distribution with constant variance; then, ordinary leastsquares regression is applicable. With GLMs, by contrast, the choice of link function is separate from the choice of random component. If a link is useful in the sense that a linear model for the predictors is plausible for that link, it is not necessary that it also stabilizes variance or produces normality. This is because the fitting process maximizes the likelihood for the choice of distribution for Y, and that choice is not restricted to normality.

4.1.5 Deviance
For a particular GLM for observations y s ЕҪ y1, . . . , yN ., let LЕҪвҗ®; y. denote the log-likelihood function expressed in terms of the means вҗ® s ЕҪвҗ®1, . . . , вҗ®N ..
Let LЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ ; y. denote the maximum of the log likelihood for the model.
Considered for all possible models, the maximum achievable log likelihood is

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL

119

LЕҪy; y.. This occurs for the most general model, having a separate parameter
for each observation and the perfect fit вҗ®ЛҶ s y. Such a model is called the
saturated model. This model is not useful, since it does not provide data reduction. However, it serves as a baseline for comparison with other model fits.
The deВ®iance of a Poisson or binomial GLM is defined to be
y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ ; y. y LЕҪy; y. .
This is the likelihood-ratio statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the model holds against the general alternative ЕҪi.e., the saturated model.. For some Poisson and binomial GLMs, the number of observations N stays fixed as the individual counts increase in size. Then the deviance has a chi-squared asymptotic null distribution. The df s N y p, where p is the number of model parameters; that is, df equals the difference between the numbers of parameters in the saturated and unsaturated models. The deviance then provides a test of model fit.
An example is binomial counts at N fixed settings of predictors when the number of trials at each setting increases. Let Yi be binЕҪ ni, вҗІi., i s 1, . . . , N. Consider the simple model of homogeneity, вҗІi s вҗЈ all i. It has p s 1 parameter. The saturated model makes no assumption about Г„вҗІi4, letting them be any N values between 0 and 1.0. It has N parameters. The deviance for the homogeneity model has df s N y 1. In fact, it equals the G2 likelihood-ratio statistic ЕҪ3.11. for testing independence in the N = 2 table that these samples form. Under independence, it has approximately a chisquared distribution as the Г„ni4 increase, for fixed N.
We use the deviance throughout the book for model checking and for inferential comparisons of models. Components of the deviance are residual measures of lack of fit. Methods for analyzing the deviance generalize analysis of variance methods for normal linear models.

4.1.6 Advantages of the GLM Formulation
GLMs provide a unified theory of modeling that encompasses the most important models for continuous and discrete variables. Models studied in this text are GLMs with binomial or Poisson random component, or multivariate extensions of GLMs. The ML parameter estimates are computed with an algorithm, presented in Section 4.6, that iteratively uses a weighted version of least squares. The reason for restricting GLMs to the exponential family of distributions for Y is that the same algorithm applies to this entire family, for any choice of link function.
Most statistical software has the facility to fit GLMs. Appendix A gives details.

120

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

4.2 GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

Let Y denote a binary response variable. For instance, Y might indicate vote in a British election ЕҪLabour, Conservative., choice of automobile ЕҪdomestic, import., or diagnosis of breast cancer ЕҪpresent, absent.. Each observation has one of two outcomes, denoted by 0 and 1, binomial for a single trial. The mean EЕҪY . s PЕҪY s 1.. We denote PЕҪY s 1. by вҗІ ЕҪx., reflecting its dependence on values x s ЕҪ x1, . . . , x p. of predictors. The variance of Y is
varЕҪ Y . s вҗІ ЕҪx. 1 y вҗІ ЕҪx. ,

the binomial variance for one trial. In introducing GLMs for binary data, for simplicity we use a single explanatory variable.

4.2.1 Linear Probability Model For a binary response, the regression model
вҗІ ЕҪ x. sвҗЈqвҗӨx

ЕҪ 4 .5.

is called a linear probability model. With independent observations it is a GLM with binomial random component and identity link function.
The linear probability model has a major structural defect. Probabilities fall between 0 and 1, but linear functions take values over the entire real line. Model ЕҪ4.5. has вҗІ ЕҪ x. - 0 and вҗІ ЕҪ x. ) 1 for sufficiently large or small x values. For its extension with multiple predictors, difficulties often occur
fitting this model because during the fitting process, вҗІЛҶ ЕҪx. falls outside the
w0, 1x range for some subjectsвҖҷ x values. The model can be valid over a restricted range of x values. When it is plausible, an advantage is its simple interpretation: вҗӨ is the change in вҗІ ЕҪ x. for a one-unit increase in x.
We defer to Section 4.6 the technical details of fitting this and other GLMs. One should assume a binomial distribution for Y and use maximum likelihood ЕҪML. rather than ordinary least squares. Least squares is ML for a normal distribution with constant variance. For binary responses, the constant variance condition that makes least squares estimators optimal ЕҪi.e., minimum variance in the class of linear unbiased estimators. is not satisfied. Since varЕҪY . s вҗІ ЕҪ x.w1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x.x, the variance depends on x through its influence on вҗІ ЕҪ x.. As вҗІ ЕҪ x. moves toward 0 or 1, the distribution of Y is more nearly concentrated at a single point, and the variance moves toward 0. Because of the nonconstant variance, the binomial ML estimator is more efficient than least squares. Also Y, being binary, is very far from normally distributed. Thus, the usual sampling distributions for the least squares estimators do not apply. The estimates and standard errors for ML and least
squares are usually similar, however, when вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. for the sample x values falls
in the range within which the variance is relatively stable ЕҪabout 0.3 to 0.7..

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

121

TABLE 4.2 Relationship between Snoring and Heart Disease

Snoring

Heart Disease

Yes

No

Proportion Yes

Linear Fit a

Logit Fit a

Never

24

1355

Occasionally

35

603

Nearly every night

21

192

Every night

30

224

0.017 0.055 0.099 0.118

0.017 0.057 0.096 0.116

0.021 0.044 0.093 0.132

aModel fits refer to proportion of yes responses. Source: P. G. Norton and E. V. Dunn, British Med. J. 291: 630бҺҗ632 ЕҪ1985., BMJ Publishing
Group.

4.2.2 Snoring and Heart Disease Example
We illustrate the linear probability model with Table 4.2, from an epidemiological survey of 2484 subjects to investigate snoring as a risk factor for heart disease. Those surveyed were classified according to their spousesвҖҷ report of how much they snored. The model states that the probability of heart disease is linearly related to the level of snoring x. We treat the rows of the table as independent binomial samples. No obvious choice of scores exists for categories of x. We used ЕҪ0, 2, 4, 5., treating the last two levels as closer than the other adjacent pairs ЕҪProblem 4.4 uses equally spaced scores.. ML estimates and standard errors are the same if we use a data file of 2484 binary observations or if we enter the four binomial totals of yes and no responses listed in Table 4.2.
Software ЕҪsee, e.g., Table A.3 for SAS. reports the ML fit, вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. s 0.0172 q 0.0198 x, with a standard error SE s 0.0028 for вҗӨЛҶs 0.0198. For nonsnor-
ers ЕҪ x s 0., the estimated proportion of subjects having heart disease is 0.0172. We refer to the estimated values of EЕҪY . for a GLM as fitted В®alues. Table 4.2 shows the sample proportions and the fitted values for this model. Figure 4.1 graphs the sample and fitted values. The table and graph suggest that the model fits well. ЕҪIn Section 5.2.3 we discuss formal goodness-of-fit analyses for binary-response GLMs.. The model interpretation is simple. The estimated probability of heart disease is about 0.02 for nonsnorers; it increases 2ЕҪ0.0198. s 0.04 for occasional snorers, another 0.04 for those who snore nearly every night, and another 0.02 for those who always snore.

4.2.3 Logistic Regression Model
Usually, binary data result from a nonlinear relationship between вҗІ ЕҪ x. and x. A fixed change in x often has less impact when вҗІ ЕҪ x. is near 0 or 1 than when вҗІ ЕҪ x. is near 0.5. In the purchase of an automobile, consider the choice between buying new or used. Let вҗІ ЕҪ x. denote the probability of selecting new when annual family income s x. An increase of $50,000 in annual

122

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

FIGURE 4.1 Predicted probabilities for linear probability and logistic regression models.

income would have less effect when x s $1,000,000 wfor which вҗІ ЕҪ x. is near 1x than when x s $50,000.
In practice, nonlinear relationships between вҗІ ЕҪ x. and x are often monotonic, with вҗІ ЕҪ x. increasing continuously or вҗІ ЕҪ x. decreasing continuously as x increases. The S-shaped curves in Figure 4.2 are typical. The most important curve with this shape has the model formula

вҗІ ЕҪ x . s expЕҪ вҗЈ 1 q expЕҪ вҗЈ q вҗӨ x . . q вҗӨ x .

ЕҪ 4 .6.

This is the logistic regression model. As x в„ў Пұ, вҗІ ЕҪ x.x0 when вҗӨ - 0 and вҗІ ЕҪ x.вү 1 when вҗӨ ) 0.
LetвҖҷs find the link function for which logistic regression is a GLM. For ЕҪ4.6. the odds are
1 s вҗІ ЕҪ x . y вҗІ ЕҪ x . expЕҪ вҗЈ q вҗӨ x . .

The log odds has the linear relationship
вҗІЕҪ x. log 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x.

ЕҪ 4 .7.

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

123

FIGURE 4.2 Logistic regression functions.
Thus, the appropriate link is the log odds transformation, the logit. Logistic regression models are GLMs with binomial random component and logit link function. Logistic regression models are also called logit models.
The logit is the natural parameter of the binomial distribution, so the logit link is its canonical link. Whereas вҗІ ЕҪ x. must fall in the ЕҪ0, 1. range, the logit can be any real number. The real numbers are also the range for linear predictors ЕҪsuch as вҗЈ q вҗӨ x. that form the systematic component of a GLM. So this model does not have the structural problem that is true of the linear probability model.
For the snoring data in Table 4.2, software reports the logistic regression ML fit
logit вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x . s y3.87 q 0.40 x.
The positive вҗӨЛҶs 0.40 reflects the increased incidence of heart disease at
higher snoring levels. In Chapters 5 and 6 we study logistic regression in detail and interpret such equations. Estimated probabilities result from substituting x values into the estimate of probability formula ЕҪ4.6.. Table 4.2 also reports these fitted values. Figure 4.1 displays the fit. The fit is close to linear over this narrow range of estimated probabilities, and results are similar to those for the linear probability model.

124

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

4.2.4 Binomial GLM for 2 = 2 Contingency Tables
Among the simplest GLMs for a binary response is the one having a single explanatory variable X that is also binary. Label its values by 0 and 1. For a given link function, the GLM
link вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x

has the effect of X described by

вҗӨ s link вҗІ ЕҪ1. y link вҗІ ЕҪ0. .

For the identity link, вҗӨ s вҗІ ЕҪ1. y вҗІ ЕҪ0. is the difference between proportions. For the log link, вҗӨ s logwвҗІ ЕҪ1.x y logwвҗІ ЕҪ0.x s logwвҗІ ЕҪ1.rвҗІ ЕҪ0.x is the log relative risk. For the logit link,

вҗӨ s logit вҗІ ЕҪ1. y logit вҗІ ЕҪ0. вҗІ ЕҪ1.rЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪ1. .
s log вҗІ ЕҪ0. rЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪ0. .

вҗІ ЕҪ1.

вҗІ ЕҪ0.

s log 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ1. y log 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ0.

is the log odds ratio. Measures of association for 2 = 2 tables are effect parameters in GLMs for binary data.

4.2.5 Probit and Inverse CDF Link Functions*

A monotone regression curve such as the first one in Figure 4.2 has the shape of a cumulative distribution function ЕҪcdf. for a continuous random variable. This suggests a model for a binary response having form вҗІ ЕҪ x. s FЕҪ x. for some cdf F.
Using an entire class of location-scale cdf вҖҷs, such as normal cdf вҖҷs with their variety of means and variances, permits the curve вҗІ ЕҪ x. s FЕҪ x. to have flexibility in the rate of increase and in the location where most of that increase occurs. Let вҢҪЕҪРё. denote the standard cdf of the class, such as the NЕҪ0, 1. cdf. Using вҢҪ but writing the model as

вҗІ ЕҪ x. s вҢҪЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨx.

ЕҪ 4 .8.

provides the same flexibility. Shapes of different cdf вҖҷs in the class occur as вҗЈ and вҗӨ vary. Replacing x by вҗӨ x permits the curve to increase at a different rate than the standard cdf ЕҪor even to decrease if вҗӨ - 0.; varying вҗЈ moves the curve to the left or right.
When вҢҪ is strictly increasing over the entire real line, its inverse function вҢҪy1ЕҪРё. exists and ЕҪ4.8. is, equivalently,

вҢҪy1 вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x .

ЕҪ 4 .9.

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR COUNTS

125

For this class of cdf shapes, the link function for the GLM is вҢҪy1. The link function maps the ЕҪ0, 1. range of probabilities onto ЕҪyПұ, Пұ., the range of linear predictors. The curve has the shape of a normal cdf when вҢҪ is the standard normal cdf. Model ЕҪ4.9. is then called the probit model. This curve has similar appearance to the logistic regression curve. Probit models are discussed in Section 6.6.
When вҗӨ ) 0, the logistic regression curve ЕҪ4.6. is a cdf for the logistic distribution. When вҗӨ - 0, the curve for 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x., the probability Y s 0, has that appearance. The cdf of the logistic distribution with mean вҗ® and dispersion parameter вҗ¶ ) 0 is
F ЕҪ x . s exp ЕҪ x 1 q exp ЕҪ x y вҗ®. rвҗ¶ , y вҗ®. rвҗ¶ yПұ - x - Пұ.
The corresponding probability density function is symmetric and bell-shaped,
with standard deviation вҗ¶вҗІr'3 ЕҪhere, вҗІ is the mathematical constant
3.14 . . . .. It looks much like the normal density with the same mean and standard deviation but with slightly thicker tails. ЕҪIts kurtosis equals that of a t distribution with df s 9..
The standardized form of the logistic cdf has вҗ® s 0 and вҗ¶ s 1, so вҢҪЕҪ x. s e xrЕҪ1 q e x .. For that function, the logistic regression curve ЕҪ4.6. has form вҗІ ЕҪ x. s вҢҪЕҪ вҗЈ q вҗӨ x.. By ЕҪ4.9. the logit transformation is simply the inverse function for the standard logistic cdf; that is, when вҢҪЕҪ x. s вҗІ ЕҪ x. s e xrЕҪ1 q e x ., then x s вҢҪy1wвҗІ ЕҪ x.x s logwвҗІ ЕҪ x.rЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x..x.

4.3 GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR COUNTS
The best known GLMs for count data assume a Poisson distribution for Y. We introduced this distribution in Section 1.2.3. In Chapters 8 and 9 we present Poisson GLMs for counts in contingency tables with categorical response variables. In this section we introduce Poisson GLMs using an alternative application: modeling count or rate data for a single discrete response variable.

4.3.1 Poisson Loglinear Models

The Poisson distribution has a positive mean вҗ®. Although a GLM can model a positive mean using the identity link, it is more common to model the log of the mean. Like the linear predictor вҗЈ q вҗӨ x, the log mean can take any real value. The log mean is the natural parameter for the Poisson distribution, and the log link is the canonical link for a Poisson GLM. A Poisson loglinear GLM assumes a Poisson distribution for Y and uses the log link.
The Poisson loglinear model with explanatory variable X is

log вҗ® s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x .

ЕҪ 4 .10.

126

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

For this model, the mean satisfies the exponential relationship

вҗ® s expЕҪ вҗЈ q вҗӨ x . s eвҗЈ ЕҪ e вҗӨ . x .

ЕҪ 4 .11.

A 1-unit increase in x has a multiplicative impact of e вҗӨ on вҗ®: The mean at x q 1 equals the mean at x multiplied by e вҗӨ.

4.3.2 Horseshoe Crab Mating Example
We illustrate Poisson GLMs for Table 4.3 from a study of nesting horseshoe crabs. Each female horseshoe crab had a male crab resident in her nest. The study investigated factors affecting whether the female crab had any other males, called satellites, residing nearby. Explanatory variables are the female crabвҖҷs color, spine condition, weight, and carapace width. The response outcome for each female crab is her number of satellites. For now, we use width alone as a predictor. Table 4.3 lists width in centimeters. The sample mean width equals 26.3 and the standard deviation equals 2.1.
Figure 4.3 plots the response counts of satellites against width, with numbered symbols indicating the number of observations at each point. The substantial variability makes it difficult to discern a clear trend. To get a clearer picture, we grouped the female crabs into width categories ЕҪF 23.25, 23.25бҺҗ24.25, 24.25бҺҗ25.25, 25.25бҺҗ26.25, 26.25бҺҗ27.25, 27.25бҺҗ28.25, 28.25бҺҗ29.25, ) 29.25. and calculated the sample mean number of satellites for female crabs in each category. Figure 4.4 plots these sample means against the sample mean width for crabs in each category.
More sophisticated ways of portraying the trend smooth the data without grouping the width values or assuming a particular functional relationship. Figure 4.4 also shows a smoothed curve based on an extension of the GLM introduced in Section 4.8. The sample means and the smoothed curve both show a strong increasing trend. ЕҪThe means tend to fall above the curve, since the response counts in a category tend to be skewed to the right; the smoothed curve is less susceptible to outlying observations.. The trend seems approximately linear, and we discuss next models for the ungrouped data for which the mean or the log of the mean is linear in width.
For a female crab, let вҗ® be the expected number of satellites and x s width. From GLM software ЕҪe.g., for SAS, see Table A.4., the ML fit of the Poisson loglinear model ЕҪ4.10. is
log вҗ®ЛҶ s вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx s y3.305 q 0.164 x.
The effect вҗӨЛҶs 0.164 of width is positive, with SE s 0.020. The model fitted value at any width level is an estimated mean number of satellites вҗ®ЛҶ. For
instance, the fitted value at the mean width of x s 26.3 is
вҗ®ЛҶ s expЕҪ вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx . s exp y3.305 q 0.164ЕҪ26.3. s 2.74.

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR COUNTS

127

TABLE 4.3 Number of Crab Satellites by FemaleвҖҷs Characteristicsa

C S W Wt Sa C S W Wt Sa C S W Wt Sa C S W Wt Sa

2 3 28.3 3.05 8 3 3 26.0 2.60 4 3 3 25.6 2.15 0 4 2 21.0 1.85 0 2 3 29.0 3.00 1 1 2 25.0 2.30 3 4 3 26.2 1.30 0 2 3 24.9 2.10 0 2 1 25.7 2.00 8 2 3 27.5 3.15 6 1 1 26.1 2.80 5 3 3 28.9 2.80 4 2 1 30.3 3.60 3 2 3 22.9 1.60 4 3 3 26.2 2.30 3 3 3 24.5 2.05 5 2 3 30.0 3.05 8 2 3 26.2 2.40 3 2 3 25.4 2.25 6 2 3 25.4 2.25 4 4 3 27.5 2.90 0 4 3 27.0 2.25 3 2 2 24.0 1.70 0 2 1 28.7 3.20 0 3 3 26.5 1.97 1 2 3 24.5 1.60 1 3 3 27.3 2.90 1 2 3 26.5 2.30 4 2 3 25.0 2.10 2 3 3 22.0 1.40 0 1 1 30.2 3.28 2 2 2 25.4 2.30 0 2 1 24.9 2.30 6 4 3 25.8 2.25 10 3 3 27.2 2.40 5 2 3 30.5 3.32 3 4 3 25.0 2.10 8 2 3 30.0 3.00 9 2 1 22.9 1.60 0 2 3 23.9 1.85 2 2 3 26.0 2.28 3 2 3 25.8 2.20 0 3 3 29.0 3.28 4 1 1 26.5 2.35 0

3 3 22.5 1.55 0 1 1 26.0 2.30 9 2 3 23.8 2.10 0 3 2 24.7 1.90 0 3 3 24.3 2.15 0 2 3 25.8 2.65 0 2 1 26.0 2.30 14 1 1 27.1 2.95 8 4 3 24.7 2.20 0 2 3 27.4 2.70 5 2 1 22.5 1.60 1 3 3 26.7 2.60 2 2 3 28.7 3.15 3 2 1 26.8 2.70 5 1 1 29.3 3.20 4 1 3 25.8 2.60 0 2 1 26.7 2.70 5 4 3 23.7 1.85 0 4 3 23.4 1.90 0 2 3 27.9 2.80 6 1 1 27.7 2.50 6 2 1 30.0 3.30 5 2 3 28.2 2.60 6 2 3 25.0 2.10 4 4 3 24.7 2.10 5 2 3 27.7 2.90 5 2 1 25.7 2.00 5 2 3 28.3 3.00 15 2 1 27.8 2.75 0 4 3 25.5 2.25 0 3 1 27.0 2.45 3 2 3 26.0 2.15 5 2 3 29.0 3.20 10 2 3 26.2 2.40 0 3 3 25.6 2.80 7 3 3 23.0 1.65 1 3 3 24.2 1.90 0 2 2 22.9 1.60 0 3 3 25.7 1.20 0 2 3 25.1 2.10 5 3 3 23.1 1.65 0 3 1 25.9 2.55 4 2 3 28.5 3.05 0 4 1 25.5 2.75 0 2 1 29.7 3.85 5 2 1 26.8 2.55 0 3 3 23.1 1.55 0 2 1 29.0 2.80 1 3 3 24.5 2.20 1 3 3 28.5 3.00 1 2 3 27.5 2.55 1 2 2 24.7 2.55 4 2 3 26.3 2.40 1 2 3 29.0 3.10 1 2 3 27.8 3.25 3 2 3 27.0 2.50 6 2 3 31.9 3.33 2 4 3 23.7 1.80 0 2 3 25.0 2.40 5 3 3 27.0 2.50 6 3 3 26.2 2.22 0 2 3 24.2 1.65 2 3 3 28.4 3.20 3 4 3 22.5 1.47 4 1 2 24.5 1.95 6 2 3 25.1 1.80 0 2 3 27.9 3.05 7 2 3 24.9 2.20 0 2 2 25.0 2.25 6 2 3 27.5 2.63 6 3 3 29.0 2.92 3 2 1 24.3 2.00 0 2 1 31.7 3.73 4 2 3 29.5 3.02 4 2 3 27.6 2.85 4 2 3 26.2 2.30 0 4 3 24.5 1.90 0 2 3 24.7 1.95 4 3 3 23.8 1.80 0 3 2 29.8 3.50 4 2 3 28.2 3.05 8 4 3 25.7 2.15 0 3 3 24.1 1.80 0 3 3 26.2 2.17 2 1 1 28.0 2.62 0 4 3 27.0 2.63 0

3 3 24.8 2.10 0 2 1 23.7 1.95 0 2 3 28.2 3.05 11 2 3 25.2 2.00 1 2 2 23.2 1.95 4 4 3 25.8 2.00 3 4 3 27.5 2.60 0 2 2 25.7 2.00 0 2 3 26.8 2.65 0 3 3 27.5 3.10 3 3 1 28.5 3.25 9 2 3 28.5 3.00 3 1 1 27.4 2.70 6 2 3 27.2 2.70 3 3 3 27.1 2.55 0 2 3 28.0 2.80 1 2 1 26.5 1.30 0 3 3 23.0 1.80 0 3 2 26.0 2.20 3 3 2 24.5 2.25 0 2 3 25.8 2.30 0 4 3 23.5 1.90 0 4 3 26.7 2.45 0 3 3 25.5 2.25 0 2 3 28.2 2.87 1 2 1 25.2 2.00 1 2 3 25.3 1.90 2 3 3 25.7 2.10 0 4 3 29.3 3.23 12 3 3 23.8 1.80 6 2 3 27.4 2.90 3 2 3 26.2 2.02 2 2 1 28.0 2.90 4 2 1 28.4 3.10 5 2 1 33.5 5.20 7 2 3 25.8 2.40 0 3 3 24.0 1.90 10 2 1 23.1 2.00 0 2 3 28.3 3.20 0 2 3 26.5 2.35 4 2 3 26.5 2.75 7 3 3 26.1 2.75 3 2 2 24.5 2.00 0

aC, color ЕҪ1, light medium; 2, medium; 3, dark medium; 4, dark.; S, spine condition ЕҪ1, both good; 2, one worn or broken; 3, both worn or broken.; W, carapace width ЕҪcm.; Wt, weight ЕҪkg.; Sa, number of satellites.

Source: Data courtesy of Jane Brockmann, Zoology Department, University of Florida; study described in Ethology 102:1бҺҗ21 ЕҪ1996..

128

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

FIGURE 4.3 Number of satellites by width of female crab.
For this model, exp ЕҪ вҗӨЛҶ. s exp ЕҪ0.164. s 1.18 is the multiplicative effect on вҗ®ЛҶ
for a 1-cm increase in x. For instance, the fitted value at x s 27.3 s 26.3 q 1 is exp wy3.305 q 0.164ЕҪ27.3.x s 3.23, which equals 1.18 = 2.74. A 1-cm increase in width yields an 18% increase in the estimated mean.
Figure 4.4 shows that EЕҪY . may grow approximately linearly with width. This suggests the Poisson GLM with identity link. It has ML fit
вҗ®ЛҶ s вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx s y11.53 q 0.55 x .
This model has an additive rather than a multiplicative effect of X on вҗ®.
A 1-cm increase in x has an estimated increase of вҗӨЛҶs 0.55 in вҗ®ЛҶ. The fitted
values are positive at all sampled x, and the model describes simply the effect: On the average, about a 2-cm increase in width is associated with an extra satellite.
Figure 4.5 plots вҗ®ЛҶ against width for the models with log link and identity
link. Although they diverge somewhat for relatively small and large widths, they provide similar predictions over the width range in which most observations occur. We now study whether either model fits adequately.

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR COUNTS

129

FIGURE 4.4 Smoothings of horseshoe crab counts.

TABLE 4.4 Sample Mean and Variance of Number of Satellites

Width ЕҪcm.

Number of Cases

Number of Satellites

Sample Mean

- 23.25

14

23.25бҺҗ24.25

14

24.25бҺҗ25.25

28

25.25бҺҗ26.25

39

26.25бҺҗ27.25

22

27.25бҺҗ28.25

24

28.25бҺҗ29.25

18

) 29.25

14

14

1.00

20

1.43

67

2.39

105

2.69

63

2.86

93

3.87

71

3.94

72

5.14

Sample Variance
2.77 8.88 6.54 11.38 6.88 8.81 16.88 8.29

130

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

FIGURE 4.5 Estimated mean number of satellites for log and identity links.
4.3.3 Overdispersion for Poisson GLMs
In Section 1.2.4 we noted that count data often show greater variability than the Poisson allows. For the grouped horseshoe crab data, Table 4.4 shows the sample mean and variance for the counts of number of satellites for the female crabs in each width category. The variances are much larger than the means, whereas Poisson distributions have identical mean and variance. The greater variability than predicted by the GLM random component reflects oВ®erdispersion.
A common cause of overdispersion is subject heterogeneity. For instance, suppose that width, weight, color, and spine condition are the four predictors that affect a female crabвҖҷs number of satellites. Suppose that Y has a Poisson distribution at each fixed combination of those predictors. Our model uses width alone as a predictor. Crabs having a certain width are then a mixture of crabs of various weights, colors, and spine conditions. Thus, the population of crabs having that width is a mixture of several Poisson populations, each having its own mean for the response. This heterogeneity results in an overall response distribution at that width having greater variation than the Poisson predicts. If the variance equals the mean when all relevant variables are controlled, it exceeds the mean when only one is controlled.
Overdispersion is not an issue in ordinary regression with normally distributed Y, because that distribution has a separate parameter ЕҪthe variance.

GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS FOR COUNTS

131

to describe variability. For binomial and Poisson distributions, however, the variance is a function of the mean. Overdispersion is common in the modeling of counts. When the model for the mean is correct but the true distribution is not Poisson, the ML estimates of model parameters are still consistent but standard errors are incorrect. We next introduce an extension of the Poisson GLM that has an extra parameter and accounts better for overdispersion. In Section 4.7 we present another approach for this, quasilikelihood inference.

4.3.4 Negative Binomial GLMs

The negatiВ®e binomial distribution has probability mass function

Еҫ / Еҫ / f ЕҪ y; k, вҗ®. s вҢ«ЕҪ y q k. вҢ«ЕҪ k. вҢ«ЕҪ y q 1.

kk

ky

вҗ®qk 1y вҗ®qk ,

y s 0, 1, 2, . . . ,

ЕҪ 4 .12.

where k and вҗ® are parameters. This distribution has
EЕҪ Y . s вҗ®, varЕҪ Y . s вҗ® q вҗ®2rk .
The index ky1 is called a dispersion parameter. As ky1 в„ў 0, varЕҪY . в„ў вҗ® and the negative binomial distribution converges to the Poisson ЕҪCameron and Trivedi 1998, p. 75.. Usually, ky1 is unknown. Estimating it helps summarize the extent of overdispersion.
For k fixed, one can express ЕҪ4.12. in natural exponential family form ЕҪ4.1.. Then, a model with negative binomial random component is a GLM. For simplicity, such models let k be the same constant for all observations but treat it as unknown. As in GLMs for binary data, a variety of link functions are possible. Most common is the log link, as in Poisson loglinear models, but sometimes the identity link is adequate.
In Section 13.4 we discuss negative binomial GLMs. We illustrate it here for the crab data analyzed above with Poisson GLMs. With the identity link
and width as predictor, the Poisson GLM has вҗ®ЛҶ s y11.53 q 0.55 x ЕҪSE s 0.06 for вҗӨЛҶ.. For the negative binomial GLM, вҗ®ЛҶ s y11.15 q 0.53 x ЕҪSE s 0.11.. Moreover, ЛҶky1 s 0.98, so at a predicted вҗ®ЛҶ, the estimated variance is roughly вҗ®ЛҶ q вҗ®ЛҶ2, compared to вҗ®ЛҶ for the Poisson GLM. Although fitted values are similar, the greater SE for вҗӨЛҶ and the greater estimated variance in the
negative binomial model reflect the overdispersion uncaptured with the Poisson GLM.

4.3.5 Poisson Regression for Rates
When events of a certain type occur over time, space, or some other index of size, it is usually more relevant to model the rate at which they occur than the number of them. For instance, a study of homicides in a given year for a

132

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

sample of cities might model the homicide rate, defined for a city as its number of homicides that year divided by its population size. The model might describe how the rate depends on the cityвҖҷs unemployment rate, its residentsвҖҷ median income, and the percentage of residents having completed high school. In Section 9.7 we discuss Poisson regression for modeling rates.

4.3.6 Poisson GLM of Independence in I = J Contingency Tables

One use of Poisson loglinear models is in modeling counts in contingency tables. We illustrate for two-way tables with independent counts Г„Yi j4 having Poisson distributions with means Г„вҗ®i j4. Suppose that Г„вҗ®i j4 satisfy

вҗ®i j s вҗ®вҗЈi вҗӨj,

where Г„ вҗЈi4 and Г„ вҗӨj4 are positive constants satisfying Гқi вҗЈi s Гқj вҗӨj s 1. This is a multiplicative model, but a linear predictor for a GLM results using the log
link,

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗЈiU q вҗӨjU ,

ЕҪ 4 .13.

where вҗӯ s log вҗ®, вҗЈiU s log вҗЈi, вҗӨjU s log вҗӨj. This Poisson loglinear model has additive main effects of the two classifications but no interaction.
Since the Г„Yi j4 are independent, the total sample size ГқiГқjYi j has a Poisson distribution with mean ГқiГқj вҗ®i j s вҗ®. Conditional on ГқiГқjYi j s n, the cell counts have a multinomial distribution with probabilities Г„вҗІi j s вҗ®i jrвҗ® s вҗЈi вҗӨj4. Similarly, you can check that conditional on n, the row totals Г„Yiq4 have a multinomial distribution with probabilities Г„вҗІiqs вҗЈi4 and the column totals Г„Yqj4 have a multinomial distribution with probabilities Г„вҗІqj s вҗӨj4.
Conditional on n, the model is a multinomial one that satisfies вҗІi j s вҗЈi вҗӨj s вҗІiqвҗІqj. This is independence of the two classifications. In fact, in Poisson form independence is the loglinear model ЕҪ4.13.. The inferences conducted in Chapter 3 about independence in two-way contingency tables relate to GLMs, either Poisson loglinear models or corresponding multinomial models that fix n or the row or column totals. In Chapters 8 and 9 we present more complex loglinear models for contingency tables.

4.4 MOMENTS AND LIKELIHOOD FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS*
Having introduced GLMs for binary and count data, we now turn our attention to details such as likelihood equations and methods for fitting them. The remainder of this chapter is somewhat technical, providing general results applying to most modeling methods presented in subsequent chapters. See McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989. for further details.

MOMENTS AND LIKELIHOOD FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

133

It is helpful to extend the notation for a GLM so that it can handle many distributions that have a second parameter. The random component of the GLM specifies that the N observations ЕҪ y1, . . . , yN . on Y are independent, with probability mass or density function for yi of form
f ЕҪ yi ; вҗӘi , вҗҫ . s expГ„ yiвҗӘi y bЕҪ вҗӘi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . q cЕҪ yi , вҗҫ . 4 . ЕҪ4.14.
This is called the exponential dispersion family and вҗҫ is called the dispersion
parameter ЕҪJoЦҖ rgensen 1987.. The parameter вҗӘi is the natural parameter.
When вҗҫ is known, ЕҪ4.14. simplifies to the form ЕҪ4.1. for the natural exponential family, which is
f ЕҪ yi ; вҗӘi . s aЕҪ вҗӘi . bЕҪ yi . exp yi QЕҪ вҗӘi . .
We identify QЕҪвҗӘ . here with вҗӘraЕҪвҗҫ . in ЕҪ4.14., aЕҪвҗӘ . with expwybЕҪвҗӘ .raЕҪвҗҫ .x in ЕҪ4.14., and bЕҪ y. with exp w cЕҪ y, вҗҫ .x in ЕҪ4.14.. The more general formula ЕҪ4.14. is not needed for one-parameter families such as the binomial and Poisson. Usually, aЕҪвҗҫ . has form aЕҪвҗҫ . s вҗҫrвҗ»i for a known weight вҗ»i. For instance, when yi is a mean of ni independent readings, such as a sample proportion for ni Bernoulli trials, вҗ»i s ni ЕҪSection 4.4.2..

4.4.1 Mean and Variance Functions for the Random Component General expressions for EЕҪYi. and var ЕҪYi. use terms in ЕҪ4.14.. Let Li s log f ЕҪ yi; вҗӘi, вҗҫ . denote the contribution of yi to the log likelihood; that is, the log-likelihood function is L s Гқi Li. Then, from ЕҪ4.14.,

Li s yiвҗӘi y bЕҪ вҗӘi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . q cЕҪ yi , вҗҫ . .

ЕҪ 4 .15.

Therefore,

СЁ LirСЁвҗӘi s yi y bX ЕҪ вҗӘi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . ,

СЁ

2

LirСЁвҗӘ

2 i

s

ybY

ЕҪ

вҗӘ

i

.

raЕҪ

вҗҫ

.

,

where bXЕҪвҗӘi. and bYЕҪвҗӘi. denote the first two derivatives of bЕҪРё. evaluated at вҗӘi. We now apply the general likelihood results

Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁL

СЁ 2L

СЁL 2

E СЁвҗӘ s 0 and yE СЁвҗӘ 2 s E СЁвҗӘ ,

which hold under regularity conditions satisfied by the exponential family ЕҪCox and Hinkley 1974, Sec. 4.8.. From the first formula applied with a single observation, EwYi y bXЕҪвҗӘi.xraЕҪвҗҫ . s 0, or

вҗ®i s EЕҪ Yi . s bX ЕҪ вҗӘi . .

ЕҪ 4 .16.

134

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

From the second formula,

bY ЕҪ вҗӘi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . s E ЕҪ Yi y bX ЕҪ вҗӘi . .raЕҪ вҗҫ . 2 s varЕҪ Yi . r aЕҪ вҗҫ . 2,

so that

varЕҪ Yi . s bY ЕҪ вҗӘi . aЕҪ вҗҫ . .

In summary, the function bЕҪРё. in ЕҪ4.14. determines moments of Yi.

ЕҪ 4 .17.

4.4.2 Mean and Variance Functions for Poisson and Binomial

We illustrate the mean and variance expressions for Poisson and binomial distributions. When Yi is Poisson,

eyвҗ® iвҗ® yi i

f ЕҪ yi ; вҗ®i . s

s expЕҪ yi log вҗ®i y вҗ®i y log yi!.

yi !

s exp yiвҗӘi y expЕҪ вҗӘi . y log yi! ,

where вҗӘi s log вҗ®i. This has exponential dispersion form ЕҪ4.14. with bЕҪвҗӘi. s exp ЕҪвҗӘi., aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1, and cЕҪ yi, вҗҫ . s ylog yi!. The natural parameter is вҗӘi s log вҗ®i. From ЕҪ4.16. and ЕҪ4.17.,
EЕҪ Yi . s bX ЕҪ вҗӘi . s expЕҪ вҗӘi . s вҗ®i , varЕҪ Yi . s bY ЕҪ вҗӘi . s expЕҪ вҗӘi . s вҗ®i .

Next, suppose that niYi has a bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. distribution; that is, here yi is the sample proportion ЕҪrather than number. of successes, so EЕҪYi. is independent of ni. Let вҗӘi s logwвҗІirЕҪ1 y вҗІi.x. Then, вҗІi s exp ЕҪвҗӘi.rw1 q exp ЕҪвҗӘi.x and logЕҪ1 y вҗІi. s ylogw1 q exp ЕҪвҗӘi.x. Extending ЕҪ4.3., one can show that

Еҫ / f ЕҪ yi; вҗІi , ni. s

ni ni yi

вҗІ ini yi ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ i . niyn i yi

yiвҗӘi y log 1 q expЕҪ вҗӘi .
s exp 1rni

Еҫ / q log ni . ni yi

ЕҪ 4 .18.

Еҫ / This has exponential dispersion form ЕҪ4.14. with bЕҪвҗӘi. s logw1 q exp ЕҪвҗӘi.x,

aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1rni, and

cЕҪ yi, вҗҫ . s log

ni ny

. The natural parameter is the logit,

ii

вҗӘi s logwвҗІirЕҪ1 y вҗІi.x. From ЕҪ4.16. and ЕҪ4.17.,

EЕҪ Yi . s bX ЕҪ вҗӘi . s expЕҪ вҗӘi . r 1 q expЕҪ вҗӘi . s вҗІi ,
varЕҪ Yi . s bY ЕҪ вҗӘi . aЕҪ вҗҫ . s expЕҪ вҗӘi . rВҪ 1 q expЕҪ вҗӘi . 2 ni 5 s вҗІi ЕҪ1 y вҗІi . rni .

MOMENTS AND LIKELIHOOD FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

135

4.4.3 Systematic Component and Link Function
Let ЕҪ xi1, . . . , xi p. denote values of explanatory variables for observation i. The systematic component of a GLM relates parameters Г„вҗ©i4 to these variables using a linear predictor

вҗ©i s Гқ вҗӨj xi j ,
j

i s 1, . . . , N.

In matrix form,

вҗ© s XвҗӨ,

where вҗ© s ЕҪвҗ©1, . . . , вҗ©N .X, вҗӨ s ЕҪ вҗӨ1, . . . , вҗӨp.X are column vectors of model parameters, and X is the N = p matrix of values of the explanatory variables
for the N subjects. In ordinary linear models, X is called the design matrix. It
need not refer to an experimental design, however, and the GLM literature
calls it the model matrix. The GLM links вҗ©i to вҗ®i s EЕҪYi. by a link function gЕҪРё.. Thus, вҗ®i relates to
the explanatory variables by

вҗ©i s g ЕҪ вҗ®i . s Гқ вҗӨj xi j ,
j

i s 1, . . . , N.

The link function g for which gЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗӘi in ЕҪ4.14. is the canonical link. For it, the direct relationship
вҗӘi s Гқ вҗӨj xij
j

occurs between the natural parameter and the linear predictor. Since вҗ®i s bXЕҪвҗӘi., the natural parameter is the function of the mean,
вҗӘi s ЕҪ bX .y1 ЕҪвҗ®i., where ЕҪ bX .y1 ЕҪРё. denotes the inverse function to bX. Thus, the canonical link is the inverse of bX. In the Poisson case, for instance, bЕҪвҗӘi. s exp ЕҪвҗӘi., so bXЕҪвҗӘi. s exp ЕҪвҗӘi. s вҗ®i. Thus, ЕҪ bX .y1 ЕҪРё. is the inverse of the exponential function, which is the log function ЕҪi.e., вҗӘi s log вҗ®i.. The canonical link is the log link.

4.4.4 Likelihood Equations for a GLM For N independent observations, from ЕҪ4.15. the log likelihood is

LЕҪ вҗӨ. s Гқ Li s Гқ log f ЕҪ yi ; вҗӘi , вҗҫ . s Гқ q yiвҗӘi y bЕҪ вҗӘi . Гқ cЕҪ yi , вҗҫ . .

i

i

i aЕҪ вҗҫ .

i

ЕҪ 4 .19.

The notation LЕҪвҗӨ. reflects the dependence of вҗӘ on the model parameters вҗӨ.

136

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

The likelihood equations are
СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ . rСЁвҗӨj s Гқ СЁ LirСЁвҗӨj s 0
i
for all j. To differentiate the log likelihood ЕҪ4.19., we use the chain rule,

s СЁ Li СЁ Li СЁвҗӘi СЁвҗ®i СЁвҗ©i . СЁвҗӨj СЁвҗӘi СЁвҗ®i СЁвҗ©i СЁвҗӨj

ЕҪ 4 .20.

Since СЁ LirСЁвҗӘi s w yi y bXЕҪвҗӘi.xraЕҪвҗҫ ., and since вҗ®i s bXЕҪвҗӘi. and var ЕҪYi. s bYЕҪвҗӘi.aЕҪвҗҫ . from ЕҪ4.16. and ЕҪ4.17.,
СЁ LirСЁвҗӘi s ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . raЕҪ вҗҫ . , СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗӘi s bY ЕҪ вҗӘi . s varЕҪ Yi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . .
Also, since вҗ©i s Гқj вҗӨj xi j, СЁвҗ©irСЁвҗӨj s xi j .

Finally, since вҗ©i s gЕҪвҗ®i., СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i depends on the link function for the model. In summary, substituting into ЕҪ4.20. gives us

СЁ Li yi y вҗ®i aЕҪ вҗҫ . СЁвҗ®i

ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . xi j СЁвҗ®i

СЁвҗӨj s aЕҪ вҗҫ . varЕҪ Yi . СЁвҗ©i xi j s varЕҪ Yi . СЁвҗ©i .

ЕҪ 4 .21.

The likelihood equations are

N ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . xi j СЁвҗ®i

Гқ

s 0,

is1 varЕҪ Yi . СЁвҗ©i

j s 1, . . . , p.

ЕҪ 4 .22.

Although вҗӨ does not appear in these equations, it is there implicitly through вҗ®i, since вҗ®i s gy1 ЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j.. Different link functions yield different sets of equations.
Interestingly, the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. depend on the distribution of Yi only through вҗ®i and varЕҪYi.. The variance itself depends on the mean through a particular functional form
varЕҪ Yi . s В®ЕҪвҗ®i .
for some function В®, such as В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗ®i for the Poisson, В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i. for the Bernoulli, and В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҙ 2 ЕҪi.e., constant. for the normal. When Yi has distribution in the natural exponential family, the relationship between
the mean and the variance characterizes the distribution ЕҪJoЦҖ rgensen 1987..
For instance, if Yi has distribution in the natural exponential family and if В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗ®i, then necessarily Yi has the Poisson distribution.

MOMENTS AND LIKELIHOOD FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

137

4.4.5 Likelihood Equations for Binomial GLMs
Using notation from Section 4.4.2, suppose that niYi has a bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. distribution. Then yi is a sample proportion of successes for ni trials. The binomial GLM ЕҪ4.8. for a single predictor extends with several predictors to

Еҫ / вҗІi s вҢҪ Гқ вҗӨj xi j , j

ЕҪ 4 .23.

where вҢҪ is the standard cdf of some class of continuous distributions. Since вҗІ i s вҗ®i s вҢҪЕҪвҗ©i. with вҗ©i s Гқj вҗӨj xi j,
Еҫ / СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i s вҗҫ ЕҪвҗ©i . s вҗҫ Гқ вҗӨj xi j , j

where вҗҫЕҪu. s СЁ вҢҪЕҪu.rСЁ u ЕҪi.e., the probability density function corresponding to the cdf вҢҪ.. Since var ЕҪYi. s вҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi.rni, the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. simplify to

Еҫ / Гқ ni ЕҪ yi вҗҫ y вҗІi . xi j
i вҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi.

Гқ вҗӨj xij
j

s 0,

ЕҪ 4 .24.

where вҗІi s вҢҪЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j.. These depend on the link function вҢҪy1 through the derivative of its inverse.
For the logit link, вҗ©i s logwвҗІirЕҪ1 y вҗІi.x, so СЁвҗ©irСЁвҗІi s 1rwвҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi.x and СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i s СЁвҗІirСЁвҗ©i s вҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi.. Then the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. and ЕҪ4.24. simplify to

Гқ ni ЕҪ yi y вҗІi . xi j s 0,
i

ЕҪ 4 .25.

where вҗІi satisfies ЕҪ4.23. with вҢҪ the standard logistic cdf.

4.4.6 Asymptotic Covariance Matrix of Model Parameter Estimators

The likelihood function for the GLM also determines the asymptotic covari-
ance matrix of the ML estimator вҗӨЛҶ. This matrix is the inverse of the
information matrix I , which has elements EwyСЁ 2LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj x. To find
this, for the contribution Li to the log likelihood we use the helpful result

Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁ2Li
E СЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj

s yE СЁ Li СЁвҗӨh

СЁ Li , СЁвҗӨj

138

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

which holds
Еҫ СЁ 2Li
E СЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj

for exponential families ЕҪCox and Hinkley 1974,

/ s yE

ЕҪ Yi y вҗ®i . xih СЁвҗ®i ЕҪ Yi y вҗ®i . xi j СЁвҗ®i varЕҪ Yi . СЁвҗ©i varЕҪ Yi . СЁвҗ©i

Еҫ / yxih xij
s varЕҪ Yi .

СЁвҗ®i 2 СЁвҗ©i .

Sec. 4.8.. Thus,
from ЕҪ4.21.

Since LЕҪвҗӨ. s Гқi Li,

Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁ 2LЕҪвҗӨ.
E y СЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj

N xih xij
sГқ
is1 varЕҪ Yi .

СЁвҗ®i 2 СЁвҗ©i .

Generalizing from this typical element to the entire matrix, the information matrix has the form

I s XX WX,

ЕҪ 4 .26.

where W is the diagonal matrix with main-diagonal elements

wi s ЕҪ СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i . 2rvarЕҪ Yi . .

ЕҪ 4 .27.

The asymptotic covariance matrix of вҗӨЛҶ is estimated by

cov $ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . s IЛҶy1 s ЕҪXX WЛҶ X. y1 ,

ЕҪ 4 .28.

where WЛҶ is W evaluated at вҗӨЛҶ. From ЕҪ4.27., the form of W also depends on
the link function. WeвҖҷll see an example for Poisson GLMs next and for binomial GLMs in Section 5.5.

4.4.7 Likelihood Equations and Covariance Matrix for Poisson Loglinear Model The general Poisson loglinear model ЕҪ4.4. has the matrix form

log вҗ® s XвҗӨ.

For the log link, вҗ©i s log вҗ®i, so вҗ®i s exp ЕҪвҗ©i. and СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i s exp ЕҪвҗ©i. s вҗ®i. Since var ЕҪYi. s вҗ®i, the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. simplify to

Гқ ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . xi j s 0.
i

ЕҪ 4 .29.

These equate the sufficient statistics Гқi yi xi j for вҗӨ to their expected values.

INFERENCE FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

139

Also, since

wi s ЕҪ СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i . 2rvarЕҪ Yi . s вҗ®i

the estimated covariance matrix ЕҪ4.28. of вҗӨЛҶ is ЕҪXX WЛҶ X.y1, where WЛҶ is the diagonal matrix with elements of вҗ®ЛҶ on the main diagonal.

4.5 INFERENCE FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS
For most GLMs the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. are nonlinear functions of вҗӨ.
For now, we put off details about solving them for the ML estimator вҗӨЛҶ and
focus instead on using the fit for statistical inference. The Wald, score, and likelihood-ratio methods introduced in Section 1.3.3
for significance testing and interval estimation apply to any GLM. In this section we concentrate on likelihood-ratio inference, through the deВ®iance of the GLM.

4.5.1 Deviance and Goodness of Fit
From Section 4.1.5, the saturated GLM has a separate parameter for each observation. It gives a perfect fit. This sounds good, but it is not a helpful model. It does not smooth the data or have the advantages that a simpler model has, such as parsimony. Nonetheless, it serves as a baseline for other models, such as for checking model fit.
A saturated model explains all variation by the systematic component of
the model. Let вҗӘЛң denote the estimate of вҗӘ for the saturated model, corresponding to estimated means вҗ®Лңi s yi for all i. For a particular unsaturated model, denote the corresponding ML estimates by вҗӘЛҶ and вҗ®ЛҶi. For maximized log likelihood LЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ ; y. for that model and maximized log likeli-
hood LЕҪy; y. in the saturated case,

y2 log

maximum likelihood for model

s y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ ; y. y LЕҪy; y.

maximum likelihood for saturated model

describes lack of fit. It is the likelihood-ratio statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the model holds against the alternative that a more general model holds. From ЕҪ4.19.,

y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ ; y. y LЕҪy; y.

s 2 Гқ yi вҗӘЛңi y bЕҪвҗӘЛңi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . y 2 Гқ

i

i

yiвҗӘЛҶi y bЕҪвҗӘЛҶi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . .

140

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

Usually, aЕҪвҗҫ . in ЕҪ4.14. has the form aЕҪвҗҫ . s вҗҫrвҗ»i, and this statistic equals

2 Гқ вҗ»i yi Еҫ вҗӘЛңi y вҗӘЛҶi / y bЕҪвҗӘЛңi . q bЕҪвҗӘЛҶi . rвҗҫ s DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . rвҗҫ.
i

ЕҪ 4 .30.

This is called the scaled deВ®iance and DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . is called the deВ®iance. The
greater the scaled deviance, the poorer the fit. For some GLMs the scaled
deviance has an approximate chi-squared distribution.

4.5.2 Deviance for Poisson Models

For Poisson GLMs, by Section 4.4.2, вҗӘЛҶi s log вҗ®ЛҶi and bЕҪвҗӘЛҶi. s exp ЕҪвҗӘЛҶi. s вҗ®ЛҶi. Similarly, вҗӘЛңi s log yi and bЕҪвҗӘЛңi. s yi for the saturated model. Also aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1,
so the deviance and scaled deviance ЕҪ4.30. equal

DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . s 2 Гқ yi logЕҪ yirвҗ®ЛҶi . y yi q вҗ®ЛҶi .
i

ЕҪ 4 .31.

When a model with log link contains an intercept term, the likelihood
equation ЕҪ4.29. implied by that parameter is Гқ yi s Гқ вҗ®ЛҶi. Then the deviance
simplifies to

DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . s 2 Гқ yi logЕҪ yirвҗ®ЛҶi . .
i

ЕҪ 4 .32.

For two-way contingency tables, this reduces to the G2 statistic ЕҪ3.11. in
Section 3.2.1, substituting cell count ni j for yi and the independence fitted
value вҗ®ЛҶi j for вҗ®ЛҶi. For a Poisson or multinomial model applied to a contin-
gency table with a fixed number of cells N, we will see in Section 14.3 that the deviance has an approximate chi-squared distribution for large Г„вҗ®i4.

4.5.3 Deviance for Binomial Models: Grouped and Ungrouped Data

ВҪ Еҫ / 5 Now consider binomial GLMs with sample proportions Г„ yi4 based on Г„ni4
trials. By Section 4.4.2, вҗӘЛҶi s logwвҗІЛҶirЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.x and bЕҪвҗӘЛҶi. s logw1 q exp ЕҪвҗӘЛҶi.x s ylogЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.. Similarly,вҗӘЛңi s logw yirЕҪ1 y yi.x and bЕҪвҗӘЛңi. s ylogЕҪ1 y yi. for
the saturated model. Also, aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1rni, so вҗҫ s 1 and вҗ»i s ni. The deviance ЕҪ4.30. equals

2Гқ ni
i

yi

вҗІЛҶ i

yi log 1 y yi y log 1 y вҗІЛҶi

q logЕҪ1 y yi . y logЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi .

s 2 Гқ ni yi log y ni yi 2 Гқ ni yi log q niвҗІЛҶi 2 Гқ ni log 1 y yi

i

ni y ni yi

i

ni y niвҗІЛҶi

i

1 y вҗІЛҶi

s 2 Гқ ni yi log q ni yi 2 Гқ ЕҪ ni y ni yi . log ni . y ni yi

i

n iвҗІЛҶ i

i

ni y niвҗІЛҶi

INFERENCE FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

141

At setting i, ni yi is the number of successes and ЕҪ ni y ni yi. is the number of failures, i s 1, . . . , N. Thus, the deviance is a sum over the 2 N cells of
successes and failures and has the same form,

DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . s 2 Гқ observed = logЕҪobservedrfitted. ,

ЕҪ 4 .33.

as the deviance ЕҪ4.32. for Poisson loglinear models with intercept term. With binomial responses, it is possible to construct the data file as
expressed here with the counts of successes and failures at each setting for the predictors, or with the individual Bernoulli 0бҺҗ1 observations at the subject level. The deviance differs in the two cases. In the first case the saturated model has a parameter at each setting for the predictors, whereas in the second case it has a parameter for each subject. We refer to these as grouped data and ungrouped data cases. The approximate chi-squared distribution for the deviance occurs for grouped data but not for ungrouped data ЕҪsee Problems 4.22 and 5.37.. With grouped data, the sample size increases for a fixed number of settings of the predictors and hence a fixed number of parameters for the saturated model.

4.5.4 Likelihood-Ratio Model Comparison Using the Deviance For a Poisson or binomial model M, вҗҫ s 1, so the deviance ЕҪ4.30. equals

DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . s y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ ; y. y LЕҪy; y. .

ЕҪ 4 .34.

Consider two models, M0 with fitted values вҗ®ЛҶ 0 and M1 with fitted values вҗ®ЛҶ 1,
with M0 a special case of M1. Model M0 is said to be nested within M1. Since M0 is simpler than M1, a smaller set of parameter values satisfies
M0 than satisfies M1. Maximizing the log likelihood over a smaller space
cannot yield a larger maximum. Thus, LЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ 0; y. F LЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ 1; y., and it follows
from ЕҪ4.34. with the same LЕҪy; y. for each model that
DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 1 . F DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 0 . .

Simpler models have larger deviances. Assuming that model M1 holds, the likelihood-ratio test of the hypothesis that M0 holds uses the test statistic
y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ 0 ; y. y LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ 1; y.
s y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ 0 ; y. y LЕҪy; y. y Г„y2 LЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ 1; y. y LЕҪy; y. 4
s DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 0 . y DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 1 . .

The likelihood-ratio statistic comparing the two models is simply the differ-
ence between the deviances. This statistic is large when M0 fits poorly compared to M1.

142

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

In fact, since the part in ЕҪ4.30. involving the saturated model cancels, the difference between deviances,
DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 0 . y DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 1 . s 2 Гқ вҗ»i yi Еҫ вҗӘЛҶ1i y вҗӘЛҶ0i / y bЕҪвҗӘЛҶ1i . q bЕҪвҗӘЛҶ0i . ,

also has the form of the deviance. Under regularity conditions, this difference has approximately a chi-squared null distribution with df equal to the difference between the numbers of parameters in the two models.
For binomial GLMs and Poisson loglinear GLMs with intercept, from expression ЕҪ4.33. for the deviance, the difference in deviances uses the observed counts and the two sets of fitted values in the form
DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 0 . y DЕҪ y; вҗ®ЛҶ 1 . s 2 Гқ observed = logЕҪfitted1rfitted 0 . .

With binomial responses, the test comparing models does not depend on whether the data file has grouped or ungrouped form. The saturated model differs in the two cases, but its log likelihood cancels when one forms the difference between the deviances.

4.5.5 Residuals for GLMs
When a GLM fits poorly according to an overall goodness-of-fit test, examination of residuals highlights where the fit is poor. One type of residual uses
components of the deviance. In ЕҪ4.30. let DЕҪy; вҗ®ЛҶ . s Гқdi, where
di s 2 вҗ»i yi Еҫ вҗӘЛңi y вҗӘЛҶi / y bЕҪвҗӘЛңi . q bЕҪвҗӘЛҶi . .

The deВ®iance residual for observation i is
'di = signЕҪ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi . ,

ЕҪ 4 .35.

An alternative is the Pearson residual,

ei s

yi y вҗ®ЛҶi var $ЕҪ Yi . 1r2 .

ЕҪ 4 .36.

For instance, for a Poisson GLM, var ЕҪYi. s вҗ®i and the Pearson residual is
ei s ЕҪ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi . r'вҗ®ЛҶi .

For two-way contingency tables identifying yi with cell count ni j and вҗ®ЛҶi with the independence fitted value вҗ®ЛҶi j, this has the form ЕҪ3.12.; then Гқei j2 s X 2,
the Pearson X 2 statistic. Similarly, the sum of squared deviance residuals Гқdi j s G2, the likelihood-ratio statistic for testing independence.

FITTING GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

143

When the model holds, Pearson and deviance residuals are less variable than standard normal because they compare yi to the fitted means rather than the true mean ЕҪe.g., the denominator of ЕҪ4.36. estimates wvar ЕҪYi.x1r2 s
wvar ЕҪYi y вҗ®i.x1r2 rather than wvar ЕҪYi y вҗ®ЛҶi.x1r2 .. Standardized residuals divide
the ordinary residuals by their asymptotic standard errors. For GLMs the
asymptotic covariance matrix of the vector of the raw residuals Г„ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi4 is
covЕҪY y вҗ®ЛҶ . s covЕҪY. wI y Hatx .

Here, I is the identity matrix and Hat is the hat matrix,

Hat s W 1r2 XЕҪ XX WX. y1XX W 1r2 ,

ЕҪ 4 .37.

where W is the diagonal matrix with elements ЕҪ4.27. ЕҪPregibon 1981.. Let ЛҶhi
denote the estimated diagonal element of Hat for observation i, called its
leВ®erage. Then, standardizing by dividing yi y вҗ®ЛҶi by its estimated SE yields
the standardized Pearson residual

yi y вҗ®ЛҶi
' ri s ВҪ varЕҪ Yi . ЕҪ1 y ЛҶhi . 51r2 s

ei .
1 y ЛҶhi

ЕҪ 4 .38.

' For Poisson GLMs, for instance, ri s ЕҪ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi.r вҗ®ЛҶi ЕҪ1 y ЛҶhi . . Pierce and
Schafer ЕҪ1986. presented standardized deviance residuals.

In linear models the hat matrix is so-named because Hat = y projects the

data to the fitted values, вҗ®ЛҶ sвҖҳвҖҳmu-hat.вҖҷвҖҷ For GLMs, applying the estimated hat matrix to a linearized approximation for gЕҪy. yields вҗ©ЛҶ s gЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ ., the

modelвҖҷs estimated linear predictor values. The greater an observationвҖҷs lever-

age, the greater its potential influence on the fit. As in ordinary regression,

the leverages fall between 0 and 1 and sum to the number of model

parameters. Unlike ordinary regression, the hat values depend on the fit as

well as the model matrix, and points that have extreme predictor values need

not have high leverage.

4.6 FITTING GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS
Finally, we study how to find the ML estimators вҗӨЛҶ of GLM parameters. The likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. are usually nonlinear in вҗӨЛҶ. We describe a
general-purpose iterative method for solving nonlinear equations and apply it two ways to determine the maximum of a likelihood function.
4.6.1 NewtonвҖ“Raphson Method The NewtonбҺҗRaphson method is an iterative method for solving nonlinear equations, such as equations whose solution determines the point at which a function takes its maximum. It begins with an initial guess for the solution. It

144

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

obtains a second guess by approximating the function to be maximized in a neighborhood of the initial guess by a second-degree polynomial and then finding the location of that polynomialвҖҷs maximum value. It then approximates the function in a neighborhood of the second guess by another second-degree polynomial, and the third guess is the location of its maximum. In this manner, the method generates a sequence of guesses. These converge to the location of the maximum when the function is suitable andror the initial guess is good.
In more detail, hereвҖҷs how NewtonбҺҗRaphson determines the value вҗӨЛҶ at
which a function LЕҪвҗӨ. is maximized. Let uX s ЕҪСЁ LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁвҗӨ1, СЁ LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁвҗӨ2 , . . . .. Let H denote the matrix having entries hab s СЁ 2 LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁвҗӨaСЁвҗӨb, called the Hessian matrix. Let uЕҪt. and HЕҪt. be u and H evaluated at вҗӨЕҪt., the guess t for
вҗӨЛҶ. Step t in the iterative process ЕҪt s 0, 1, 2, . . . . approximates LЕҪвҗӨ. near
вҗӨЕҪt. by the terms up to second order in its Taylor series expansion,

LЕҪвҗӨ.

f LЕҪвҗӨЕҪt..

q uЕҪt.X

ЕҪвҗӨ y вҗӨЕҪt..

q

ЕҪ

1 2

.

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

y

вҗӨЕҪ

t

.

.X

H

ЕҪ

t

.

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

y

вҗӨЕҪ

t

.

.

.

Solving СЁ LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁ вҗӨ f uЕҪt. q HЕҪt.ЕҪвҗӨ y вҗӨЕҪt.. s 0 for вҗӨ yields the next guess. That guess can be expressed as

вҗӨЕҪtq1. s вҗӨЕҪt. y ЕҪ HЕҪt. . y1uЕҪt. ,

ЕҪ 4 .39.

assuming that HЕҪt. is nonsingular. ЕҪHowever, computing routines use standard methods for solving the linear equations rather than explicitly calculating the inverse..
Iterations proceed until changes in LЕҪвҗӨЕҪt.. between successive cycles are sufficiently small. The ML estimator is the limit of вҗӨЕҪt. as t в„ў Пұ; however, this need not happen if LЕҪвҗӨ. has other local maxima at which the derivative of LЕҪвҗӨ. equals 0. In that case, a good initial estimate is crucial. To help understand the NewtonбҺҗRaphson process, work through these steps when вҗӨ has a single element ЕҪProblem 4.34.. Then, Figure 4.6 illustrates a cycle of the method, showing the parabolic ЕҪsecond-order. approximation at a given step.
In the next chapter we use NewtonбҺҗRaphson for logistic regression models. For now, we illustrate it with a simpler problem for which we know the answer, maximizing the log likelihood based on an observation y from a bin ЕҪ n, вҗІ . distribution. From Section 1.3.2, the first two derivatives of LЕҪвҗІ . s y log вҗІ q ЕҪ n y y.logЕҪ1 y вҗІ . are

u s ЕҪ y y nвҗІ . rвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . , H s y yrвҗІ 2 q ЕҪ n y y . rЕҪ1 y вҗІ . 2 .

Each NewtonбҺҗRaphson step has the form

вҗІ ЕҪtq1. s вҗІ ЕҪt. q

y

nyy

ЕҪвҗІ ЕҪt..2 q ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪt..2

y1 y y nвҗІ ЕҪt.
вҗІ ЕҪt.ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪt.. .

FITTING GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

145

FIGURE 4.6 Cycle of NewtonбҺҗRaphson method.

This adjusts вҗІ ЕҪt. up if yrn ) вҗІ ЕҪt. and down if yrn - вҗІ ЕҪt.. For instance, with вҗІ ЕҪ0. s 21 , you can check that вҗІ ЕҪ1. s yrn. When вҗІ ЕҪt. s yrn, no adjust-
ment occurs and вҗІ ЕҪtq1. s yrn, which is the correct answer for вҗІЛҶ . For
starting values other than 21 , adequate convergence usually takes four or five iterations.
The convergence of вҗӨЕҪt. to вҗӨЛҶ for the NewtonбҺҗRaphson method is usually
fast. For large t, the convergence satisfies, for each j,

вҗӨ ЕҪtq1. y вҗӨЛҶ F c вҗӨ ЕҪt. y вҗӨЛҶ 2

j

j

j

j

for some c ) 0

and is referred to as second-order. This implies that the number of correct decimals in the approximation roughly doubles after sufficiently many iterations. In practice, it often takes relatively few iterations for satisfactory convergence.

4.6.2 Fisher Scoring Method
Fisher scoring is an alternative iterative method for solving likelihood equations. It resembles the NewtonбҺҗRaphson method, the distinction being with the Hessian matrix. Fisher scoring uses the expected В®alue of this matrix, called the expected information, whereas NewtonбҺҗRaphson uses the matrix itself, called the obserВ®ed information.
Let I ЕҪt. denote the approximation t for the ML estimate of the expected information matrix; that is, I ЕҪt. has elements yE ЕҪСЁ 2LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁвҗӨaСЁвҗӨb., evalu-

146

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

ated at вҗӨЕҪt.. The formula for Fisher scoring is

вҗӨЕҪtq1. s вҗӨЕҪt. q ЕҪ I ЕҪt. . y1uЕҪt.

or

I ЕҪt.вҗӨЕҪtq1. s I ЕҪt.вҗӨЕҪt. q uЕҪt..

ЕҪ 4 .40.

For estimating a binomial parameter, from Section 1.3.2 the information is nrwвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .x. A step of Fisher scoring gives

вҗІ ЕҪtq1. s вҗІ ЕҪt. q

n
вҗІ ЕҪt.ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪt..

y1 y y nвҗІ ЕҪt.
вҗІ ЕҪt.ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪt..

y y nвҗІ ЕҪt. y

s вҗІ ЕҪt. q

s.

n

n

This gives the answer for вҗІЛҶ after a single iteration and stays at that value for
successive iterations.
Formula ЕҪ4.26. showed that I s XX WX. Similarly, I ЕҪt. s XX W ЕҪt. X, where
W ЕҪt. is W wsee ЕҪ4.27.x evaluated at вҗӨЕҪt.. The estimated asymptotic covariance
matrix IЛҶy1 of вҗӨЛҶ wsee ЕҪ4.28.x occurs as a by-product of this algorithm as ЕҪ I ЕҪt..y1 for t at which convergence is adequate. From ЕҪ4.22., for both Fisher
scoring and NewtonбҺҗRaphson, u has elements

СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ . N ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . xi j СЁвҗ®i

uj s

sГқ

.

СЁвҗӨj

is1 varЕҪ Yi . СЁвҗ©i

ЕҪ 4 .41.

For GLMs with a canonical link, weвҖҷll see ЕҪSection 4.6.4. that the observed and expected information are the same. For noncanonical link models, Fisher scoring has the advantages that it produces the asymptotic covariance matrix as a by-product, the expected information is necessarily nonnegative definite, and as seen next, it is closely related to weighted least squares methods for ordinary linear models. However, it need not have second-order convergence, and for complex models the observed information is often easier to calculate. Efron and Hinkley ЕҪ1978., developing arguments of R. A. Fisher, gave reasons for preferring observed information. They argued that its variance estimates better approximate a relevant conditional variance ЕҪconditional on statistics not relevant to the parameter being estimated., it is вҖҳвҖҳcloser to the data,вҖҷвҖҷ and it tends to agree more closely with Bayesian analyses.

4.6.3 ML as Iterative Reweighted Least Squares*
A relation exists between weighted least squares estimation and using Fisher scoring to find ML estimates. We refer here to the general linear model of

FITTING GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

147

form

z s XвҗӨ q в‘Җ.

When the covariance matrix of в‘Җ is V, the weighted least squares ЕҪWLS. estimator of вҗӨ is

ЕҪ XX Vy1 X. y1XX Vy1 z.

From I s XX WX, expression ЕҪ4.41. for elements of u, and since diagonal
elements of W are wi s ЕҪСЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i.2rvarЕҪYi., it follows that in ЕҪ4.40.,

I ЕҪt.вҗӨЕҪt. q uЕҪt. s XX W ЕҪt.zЕҪt.,
where zЕҪt. has elements

ЕҪ t. ЕҪ t. ЕҪ t. СЁвҗ©iЕҪ t.

zi s Гқ xi j вҗӨj q ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . ЕҪt.

j

СЁвҗ®i

ЕҪ t. ЕҪ t. СЁвҗ©iЕҪ t.
s вҗ©i q ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . ЕҪt. .
СЁвҗ®i

Equations ЕҪ4.40. for Fisher scoring then have the form

ЕҪ XX W ЕҪt. X. вҗӨЕҪtq1. s XX W ЕҪt.zЕҪt..

These are the normal equations for using weighted least squares to fit a linear model for a response variable zЕҪt., when the model matrix is X and the inverse of the covariance matrix is W ЕҪt.. The equations have solution

вҗӨЕҪtq1. s ЕҪ XX W ЕҪt. X. y1XX W ЕҪt.zЕҪt..

The vector z in this formulation is a linearized form of the link function g, evaluated at y,
g ЕҪ yi . f g ЕҪ вҗ®i . q ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . gX ЕҪ вҗ®i . s вҗ©i q ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . ЕҪ СЁвҗ©irСЁвҗ®i . s zi . ЕҪ4.42.
This adjusted ЕҪor вҖҳвҖҳ workingвҖҷвҖҷ. response В®ariable z has element i approximated by ziЕҪt. for cycle t of the iterative scheme. That cycle regresses zЕҪt. on X with weight ЕҪi.e., inverse covariance. W ЕҪt. to obtain a new estimate вҗӨЕҪtq1. . This estimate yields a new linear predictor value вҗ©ЕҪtq1. s XвҗӨЕҪtq1. and a new adjusted response value zЕҪtq1. for the next cycle. The ML estimator results from iterative use of weighted least squares, in which the weight matrix changes at each cycle. The process is called iteratiВ®e reweighted least squares.
A simple way to begin the iterative process uses the data y as the initial estimate of вҗ®. This determines the first estimate of the weight matrix W and

148

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

hence the initial estimate of вҗӨ. It may be necessary to alter some observations slightly for this first cycle only so that gЕҪy., the initial value of z, is
finite. For instance, when g is the log link applied to counts, a count of yi s 0 is problematic, so one could set yi s 21 . This is not a problem with the model itself, since the log applies to the mean, and fitted means are usually
strictly positive in successive iterations.

4.6.4 Simplifications for Canonical Links*

Certain simplifications result with GLMs using the canonical link. For that link,
вҗ©i s вҗӘi s Гқ вҗӨj xi j .
j

Often, aЕҪвҗҫ . in the density or mass function ЕҪ4.14. is identical for all observations, such as for Poisson GLMs w aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1x and binomial GLMs with each ni s 1 wfor which aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1rni s 1x. Then the part of the log likelihood ЕҪ4.19. involving both parameters and data is Гқ yiвҗӘi, which simplifies to

Еҫ / Еҫ / Гқ yi Гқ вҗӨj xi j s Гқ вҗӨj Гқ yi xi j .

i

j

j

i

Sufficient statistics for estimating вҗӨ in the GLM are then

Гқ yi xi j ,
i

j s 1, . . . , p.

For the canonical link,

СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i s СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗӘi s СЁ bX ЕҪ вҗӘi . rСЁвҗӘi s bY ЕҪ вҗӘi . .

Thus, the contribution ЕҪ4.21. to the likelihood equation for вҗӨj simplifies to

s СЁ Li yi b y вҗ®i Y ЕҪ вҗӘi . xi j s ЕҪ yi . y вҗ®i . xi j

СЁвҗӨj varЕҪ Yi .

aЕҪ вҗҫ .

ЕҪ 4 .43.

When aЕҪвҗҫ . is identical for all observations, the likelihood equations are

Гқ xi j yi s Гқ xi j вҗ®i ,

i

i

j s 1, . . . , p.

ЕҪ 4 .44.

These equations equate the sufficient statistics for the model parameters to their expected values ЕҪNelder and Wedderburn 1972.. For a normal distribution with identity link, these are the normal equations. We obtained these for Poisson loglinear models in ЕҪ4.29. and for binomial logistic regression models ЕҪwhen each ni s 1. in ЕҪ4.25..

QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

149

From expression ЕҪ4.43. for СЁ LirСЁвҗӨj, with the canonical link the second

derivatives of the log likelihood have components

Еҫ / СЁ 2Li

xij

СЁвҗӨjСЁвҗӨh s y aЕҪ вҗҫ .

СЁвҗ®i . СЁвҗӨh

This does not depend on the observation yi, so
СЁ 2LЕҪ вҗӨ . rСЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj s E СЁ 2LЕҪ вҗӨ . rСЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj .

That is, H s yI , and the NewtonбҺҗRaphson and Fisher scoring algorithms
are identical for canonical link models ЕҪNelder and Wedderburn 1972..

4.7 QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS*

A GLM gЕҪвҗ®i. s Гқj вҗӨj xi j specifies вҗ®i using a link function g and linear
predictor. From ЕҪ4.22. and ЕҪ4.41., the ML estimates вҗӨЛҶ are the solutions of

the likelihood equations

Еҫ / N ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . xi j СЁвҗ®i

ujЕҪвҗӨ. s Гқ

s 0,

is1 В®ЕҪ вҗ®i .

СЁвҗ©i

j s 1, . . . , p, ЕҪ4.45.

where вҗ®i s gy1 ЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j. and В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s varЕҪYi.. These equations set the score functions Г„ujЕҪвҗӨ.4, which are derivatives of the log likelihood with respect to Г„ вҗӨj4, equal to 0. As we noted in Section 4.4.4, the likelihood equations depend on the assumed distribution for Yi only through вҗ®i and В®ЕҪвҗ®i.. The choice of distribution determines the meanбҺҗvariance relationship В®ЕҪвҗ®i..

4.7.1 MeanвҖ“Variance Relationship Determines Quasi-likelihood Estimates
Wedderburn ЕҪ1974. proposed an alternative approach, quasi-likelihood estimation, which assumes only a meanбҺҗvariance relationship rather than a specific distribution for Yi. It has a link function and linear predictor of the usual GLM form, but instead of assuming a distributional type for Yi it assumes only
varЕҪ Yi . s В®ЕҪ вҗ®i .
for some chosen variance function В®. The equations that determine quasilikelihood estimates are the same as the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.45. for GLMs. They are not likelihood equations, however, without the additional assumption that Г„Yi4 has distribution in the natural exponential family.
To illustrate, suppose we assume that the Г„Yi4 are independent with
В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . s вҗ®i .

150

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

The quasi-likelihood ЕҪQL. estimates are the solution of ЕҪ4.45. with В®ЕҪвҗ®i. replaced by вҗ®i. Under the additional assumption that Г„Yi4 have distribution in the exponential dispersion family ЕҪ4.14., these estimates are also ML estimates. That case is simply the Poisson distribution. Thus, for В®ЕҪвҗ®. s вҗ®, quasi-likelihood estimates are also ML estimates when the random component has a Poisson distribution.
Wedderburn suggested using the estimating equations ЕҪ4.45. for any variance function, even if it does not occur for a member of the natural exponential family. In fact, the purpose of the quasi-likelihood method was to encompass a greater variety of cases, such as discussed in Section 4.7.2. The QL estimates have asymptotic covariance matrix of the same form ЕҪ4.28. as in
GLMs, namely ЕҪXX WЛҶ X.y1 with wi s ЕҪСЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i.2rvar ЕҪYi..

4.7.2 Overdispersion for Poisson GLMs and Quasi-likelihood For count data, weвҖҷve seen ЕҪSection 4.3.3. that the Poisson assumption is often unrealistic because of overdispersionбҺҸthe variance exceeds the mean. One cause for this is heterogeneity among subjects. This suggests an alternative to a Poisson GLM in which the meanбҺҗvariance relationship has the form
В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . s вҗҫвҗ®i
for some constant вҗҫ. The case вҗҫ ) 1 represents overdispersion for the Poisson model.
In the estimating equations ЕҪ4.45. with В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫвҗ®i, вҗҫ drops out. Thus, the equations are identical to likelihood equations for Poisson models, and model parameter estimates are also identical. Also,
wi s ЕҪ СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i . 2varЕҪ Yi . s ЕҪ СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i . 2rвҗҫвҗ®i ,
so the estimated covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . s ЕҪXX WЛҶ X.y1 is вҗҫ times that for the Poisson model.
When a variance function has the form В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫ В®*ЕҪвҗ®i., usually вҗҫ is also unknown. However, вҗҫ is not in the estimating equations. Let X 2 s
ГқЕҪ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi.2rВ®*ЕҪвҗ®ЛҶi., a Pearson-type statistic for the simpler model with
вҗҫ s 1. Then X 2rвҗҫ is a sum of squares of N standardized terms. When X 2rвҗҫ is approximately chi-squared or when вҗ®i is approximately linear in вҗӨ
with В®*ЕҪвҗ®ЛҶi. close to В®*ЕҪвҗ®i., then EЕҪ X 2rвҗҫ . f N y p, the number of observa-
tions minus the number of model parameters p. Hence, Ew X 2rЕҪ N y p.x f вҗҫ. Using the motivation of moment estimation, Wedderburn ЕҪ1974. suggested
taking вҗҫЛҶ s X 2rЕҪ N y p. as the estimated multiple of the covariance matrix.
In summary, this quasi-likelihood approach for count data is simple: Fit the ordinary Poisson model and use its p parameter estimates. Multiply the
ordinary standard error estimates by 'X 2rЕҪ N y p. .
We illustrate for the horseshoe crab data analyzed with Poisson GLMs in Section 4.3.2. With the log link, the fit using width to predict number of

QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

151

satellites was log вҗ®ЛҶ s y3.305 q 0.164 x, with SE s 0.020 for вҗӨЛҶs 0.164. To
improve the adequacy of using a chi-squared statistic to summarize fit, we use the satellite totals and fit for all female crabs at a given width, to increase the counts and fitted values relative to those for individual female crabs. The N s 66 distinct width levels each have a total count yi for the number of
satellites and a fitted total вҗ®ЛҶi. The Pearson statistic comparing these is
X 2 s 174.3. The quasi-likelihood adjustment for standard errors equals
'174.3rЕҪ66 y 2. s 1.65. Thus, SE s 1.65ЕҪ0.020. s 0.033 is a more plausible
standard error for вҗӨЛҶs 0.164 in this prediction equation.
Alternative ways of handling overdispersion include mixture models that allow heterogeneity in the mean at fixed settings of predictors. For count data these include Poisson GLMs having random effects ЕҪSection 13.5. and negative binomial GLMs that result when a Poisson parameter itself has a gamma distribution ЕҪSection 4.3.4 and 13.4..

4.7.3 Overdispersion for Binomial GLMs and Quasi-likelihood

The quasi-likelihood approach can also handle overdispersion for counts
based on binary data. When yi is the sample mean of ni independent binary observations with parameter вҗІi, i s 1, . . . , N, then binomial sampling has EЕҪYi. s вҗІi and var ЕҪYi. s вҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi.rni. A simple quasi-likelihood approach uses the alternative variance function

В®ЕҪвҗІi . s вҗҫвҗІi ЕҪ1 y вҗІi . rni .

ЕҪ 4 .46.

Overdispersion occurs when вҗҫ ) 1. The quasi-likelihood estimates are the same as ML estimates for the binomial model, since вҗҫ drops out of the estimating equations ЕҪ4.45.. As in the overdispersed Poisson case, вҗҫ enters the denominator of wi. Thus, the asymptotic covariance matrix multiplies by
вҗҫ, and standard errors multiply by 'вҗҫ . An estimate of вҗҫ using the X 2 fit
statistic for the ordinary binomial model is X 2rЕҪ N y p. ЕҪFinney 1947.. Methods like these that use estimates from ordinary models but inflate
their standard errors are appropriate only if the model chosen describes well the structural relationship between the mean of Y and the predictors. If a large goodness-of-fit statistic is due to some other type of lack of fit, such as failing to include a relevant interaction term, making an adjustment for overdispersion will not address the inadequacy.
For counts with binary data, alternative mechanisms for handling overdispersion include mixture models such as binomial GLMs with random effects ЕҪSection 12.3. and models for which a binomial parameter itself has a beta distribution ЕҪSection 13.3..

4.7.4 Teratology Overdispersion Example
Table 4.5 shows results of a teratology experiment in which female rats on iron-deficient diets were assigned to four groups. Rats in group 1 were given placebo injections, and rats in other groups were given injections of an iron

152

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

TABLE 4.5 Response Counts of (Litter Size, Number Dead) for 58 Litters of Rats in Low-Iron Teratology Study Group 1: Untreated ЕҪlow iron.
ЕҪ10, 1. ЕҪ11, 4. ЕҪ12, 9. ЕҪ4, 4. ЕҪ10, 10. ЕҪ11, 9. ЕҪ9, 9. ЕҪ11, 11. ЕҪ10, 10. ЕҪ10, 7. ЕҪ12, 12. ЕҪ10, 9. ЕҪ8, 8. ЕҪ11, 9. ЕҪ6, 4. ЕҪ9, 7. ЕҪ14, 14. ЕҪ12, 7. ЕҪ11, 9. ЕҪ13, 8. ЕҪ14, 5. ЕҪ10, 10. ЕҪ12, 10. ЕҪ13, 8. ЕҪ10, 10. ЕҪ14, 3. ЕҪ13, 13. ЕҪ4, 3. ЕҪ8, 8. ЕҪ13, 5. ЕҪ12, 12.
Group 2: Injections days 7 and 10 ЕҪ10, 1. ЕҪ3, 1. ЕҪ13, 1. ЕҪ12, 0. ЕҪ14, 4. ЕҪ9, 2. ЕҪ13, 2. ЕҪ16, 1. ЕҪ11, 0. ЕҪ4, 0. ЕҪ1, 0.ЕҪ12, 0.
Group 3: Injections days 0 and 7 ЕҪ8, 0. ЕҪ11, 1. ЕҪ14, 0. ЕҪ14, 1. ЕҪ11, 0.
Group 4: Injections weekly ЕҪ3, 0. ЕҪ13, 0. ЕҪ9, 2. ЕҪ17, 2. ЕҪ15, 0. ЕҪ2, 0. ЕҪ14, 1. ЕҪ8, 0. ЕҪ6, 0. ЕҪ17, 0.
Source: Moore and Tsiatis ЕҪ1991..

supplement; this was done weekly in group 4, only on days 7 and 10 in group 2, and only on days 0 and 7 in group 3. The 58 rats were made pregnant, sacrificed after three weeks, and then the total number of dead fetuses was counted in each litter. In teratology experiments, due to unmeasured covariates and genetic variability the probability of death may vary from litter to litter within a particular treatment group.
Let yiЕҪ g. denote the proportion of dead fetuses out of the niЕҪ g. in litter i in treatment group g. Let вҗІiЕҪ g. denote the probability of death for a fetus in that litter. Consider the model with niЕҪ g. yiЕҪ g. a bin ЕҪ niЕҪ g.,вҗІ iЕҪ g.. variate, where
вҗІiЕҪ g. s вҗІg , g s 1, 2, 3, 4.
That is, the model treats all litters in a particular group g as having the
same probability of death вҗІg. The ML fit has estimate вҗІЛҶg equal to
'the sample proportion of deaths for all fetuses from litters in that group.
These equal вҗІЛҶ 1 s 0.758 ЕҪSE s 0.024., вҗІЛҶ 2 s 0.102 ЕҪSE s 0.028., вҗІЛҶ 3 s 0.034 ЕҪSE s 0.024., and вҗІЛҶ4 s 0.048 ЕҪSE s 0.021., where for group g, SE s
вҗІЛҶg ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶg .rЕҪГқi niЕҪ g. . . The estimated probability of death is considerably
higher for the placebo group.
For litter i in group g, niЕҪ g.вҗІЛҶg is a fitted number of deaths and niЕҪ g.ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶg . is a fitted number of nondeaths. Comparing these fitted values
to the observed counts of deaths and nondeaths in the N s 58 litters using the Pearson statistic gives X 2 s 154.7 with df s 58 y 4 s 54. There is considerable evidence of overdispersion. With the quasi-likelihood approach,
Г„вҗІЛҶg4 are the same as the binomial ML estimates; however, вҗҫЛҶ s X 2rЕҪ N y p. s 154.7rЕҪ58 y 4. s 2.86, so standard errors multiply by вҗҫЛҶ1r2 s 1.69.
Even with this adjustment for overdispersion, strong evidence remains that the probability of death is substantially higher for the placebo group. For

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS

153

instance, a 95% confidence interval for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 is
ЕҪ0.758 y 0.102. " 1.96 ЕҪ1.69 = 0.024. 2 q ЕҪ1.69 = 0.028. 2 1r2 or ЕҪ0.54, 0.78. .
This is wider, however, than the Wald interval of ЕҪ0.59, 0.73. for comparing independent proportions, which ignores the overdispersion.

4.8 GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS*
The GLM generalizes the ordinary linear model to permit nonnormal distributions and modeling functions of the mean. Quasi-likelihood provides a further generalization, specifying how the variance depends on the mean without assuming a given distribution. Another generalization replaces the linear predictor by smooth functions of the predictors.
4.8.1 Smoothing Data The GLM structure gЕҪвҗ®i. s Гқj вҗӨj xi j generalizes to
g ЕҪ вҗ®i . s Гқ sj ЕҪ xi j . ,
j
where sjЕҪРё. is an unspecified smooth function of predictor j. A useful smooth function is the cubic spline. It has separate cubic polynomials over sets of disjoint intervals, joined together smoothly at boundaries of those intervals.
Like GLMs, this model specifies a distribution for the random component and a link function g. The resulting model is called a generalized additiВ®e model, symbolized by GAM ЕҪHastie and Tibshirani 1990.. The GLM is the special case in which each sj is a linear function. Also possible is taking some sj as smooth functions and others as linear functions or as dummy variables for qualitative predictors.
The details for fitting GAMs are beyond our scope. The fitting algorithm employs a generalization of the NewtonбҺҗRaphson method that utilizes local smoothing. This corresponds to subtracting from the log-likelihood function a penalty function that increases as the smooth function gets more wiggly. The model fit assigns a deviance and an approximate df value to each sj in the additive predictor, enabling inference about those terms. For instance, a smooth function having df s 5 is similar in overall complexity to a fourthdegree polynomial, which has five parameters. OneвҖҷs choice of a df value ЕҪor smoothing parameter. determines how smooth the resulting GAM fit looks.
It is usually worth trying a variety of degrees of smoothing to find one that smooths the data sufficiently so that the trend is not too irregular but does

154

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

not smooth so much that it suppresses interesting patterns. This approach may suggest that a linear model is adequate with a particular link or suggest ways to improve on linearity. Some software packages that do not have GAMs can smooth the data by employing a type of regression that gives greater weight to nearby observations in predicting the value at a given point; such locally weighted least squares regression is often referred to as lowess. We prefer GAMs because they recognize explicitly the form of the response. For instance, with a binary response, lowess can give predicted values below 0 or above 1, which cannot happen with a GAM.
Even when one plans to use GLMs, a GAM can be helpful for exploratory analysis. For instance, for continuous X with continuous responses, scatter diagrams provide visual information about the dependence of Y on X. For binary responses, the following example shows that such diagrams are not very informative. Plotting the fitted smooth function for a predictor may reveal a general trend without assuming a particular functional relationship.

FIGURE 4.7 Whether satellites are present ЕҪ1, yes; 0, no., by width of female crab, with smoothing fit of generalized additive model.

NOTES

155

4.8.2 GAMs for Horseshoe Crab Example
In Section 4.3.2, Figure 4.4 showed the trend relating number of satellites for horseshoe crabs to their width. This smooth curve is the fit of a generalized additive model, assuming a Poisson distribution and using the log link.
In the next chapter weвҖҷll use logistic regression to model the probability that a crab has at least one satellite. For crab i, let yi s 1 if she has at least one satellite and yi s 0 otherwise. Figure 4.7 plots these data against x s crab width. It consists of a set of points with yi s 1 and a second set of points with yi s 0. The numbered symbols indicate the number of observations at each point. It appears that yi s 1 tends to occur relatively more often at higher x values. Figure 4.7 also shows a curve based on smoothing the data using a GAM, assuming a binomial response and logit link. This curve shows a roughly increasing trend and is more informative than viewing the binary data alone. It suggests that an S-shaped regression function may describe this relationship relatively well.

NOTES
Section 4.1: Generalized Linear Model 4.2. Distribution ЕҪ4.1. is called a natural ЕҪor linear. exponential family to distinguish it from a more general exponential family that replaces y by rЕҪ y. in the exponential term. For
other generalizations, see JoЦҖ rgensen ЕҪ1987.. Books on GLMs and related models, in
approximate order of technical level from highest to lowest, are McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989., Fahrmeir and Tutz ЕҪ2001., Aitkin et al. ЕҪ1989., Dobson ЕҪ2002., and Gill ЕҪ2000.. See also Firth ЕҪ1991..
Section 4.3: Generalized Linear Models for Counts
4.2. For further discussion of Poisson regression and related models for count data, see Breslow ЕҪ1984., Cameron and Trivedi ЕҪ1998., Frome ЕҪ1983., Hinde ЕҪ1982., Lawless ЕҪ1987., and Seeber ЕҪ1998. and references therein.
Section 4.4: Moments and Likelihood for Generalized Linear Models 4.3. The function bЕҪРё. in ЕҪ4.14. is called the cumulant function, since when aЕҪвҗҫ . s 1 its
derivatives yield the cumulants of the distribution ЕҪJoЦҖ rgensen 1987..
For many GLMs, including Poisson models with log link and binary models with logit link, with full-rank model matrix the Hessian is negative definite and the log likelihood is a strictly concave function. Then ML estimates of model parameters exist and are unique under quite general conditions ЕҪWedderburn 1976..
Section 4.5: Inference for Generalized Linear Models
4.4. The matrix W used in cov ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . wsee ЕҪ4.28.x, in the hat matrix for standardized Pearson
residuals wsee ЕҪ4.38.x, and in Fisher scoring wsee ЕҪ4.40.x is the inverse of the covariance matrix of the linearized form of gЕҪy. ЕҪsee Section 4.6.3..

156

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989, Chap. 12. discussed model checking for GLMs. For discussions about residuals, see also Green ЕҪ1984., Pierce and Schafer ЕҪ1986., Pregibon ЕҪ1980, 1981., and Williams ЕҪ1987.. Pregibon ЕҪ1982. showed that the squared standardized Pearson residual is the score statistic for testing whether the observation is an outlier. Davison and Hinkley ЕҪ1997, Sec. 7.2. discussed bootstrapping in GLMs.

Section 4.6: Fitting Generalized Linear Models
4.5. Fisher ЕҪ1935b. introduced the Fisher scoring method to calculate ML estimates for probit models. For further discussion of GLM model fitting and the relationship between iterative reweighted least squares and ML estimation, see Green ЕҪ1984.,
JoЦҖ rgensen ЕҪ1983., McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989., and Nelder and Wedderburn ЕҪ1972.. Green ЕҪ1984., JoЦҖ rgensen ЕҪ1983., and Palmgren and Ekholm ЕҪ1987. also discussed this
relation for exponential family nonlinear models.

Section 4.7: Quasi-likelihood and Generalized Linear Models 4.6. For more on quasi-likelihood, see Sections 11.4, 12.6.4, and 13.3, Breslow ЕҪ1984., Cox
ЕҪ1983., Firth ЕҪ1987., Hinde and DemВҙetrio ЕҪ1998., McCullagh ЕҪ1983., McCullagh and
Nelder ЕҪ1989., Nelder and Pregibon ЕҪ1987., and Wedderburn ЕҪ1974, 1976.. See Heyde ЕҪ1997. for a theoretical perspective.

Section 4.8: Generalized AdditiВ©e Models
4.7. Besides GAMs, other nonparametric smoothing methods can describe the dependence of a binary response on a predictor. For instance, see Copas ЕҪ1983., Lloyd ЕҪ1999, Chap. 5., and Section 15.3.3 for kernel smoothing and Kauermann and Tutz ЕҪ2001. for models with random effects.

PROBLEMS
Applications
4.1 In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, Palm Beach County in Florida was the focus of unusual voting patterns ЕҪincluding a large number of illegal double votes. apparently caused by a confusing вҖҳвҖҳbutterfly ballot.вҖҷвҖҷ Many voters claimed that they voted mistakenly for the Reform Party candidate, Pat Buchanan, when they intended to vote for Al Gore. Figure 4.8 shows the total number of votes for Buchanan plotted against the number of votes for the Reform Party candidate in 1996 ЕҪRoss Perot., by county in Florida. ЕҪFor details, see A. Agresti and B. Presnell, J. Law Public Policy, Volume 13, Fall 2001, 117бҺҗ134.. a. In county i, let вҗІi denote the proportion of the vote for Buchanan and let xi denote the proportion of the vote for Perot in 1996. For the linear probability model fitted to all counties except Palm Beach
County, вҗІЛҶi s y0.0003 q 0.0304 xi. Give the value of P in the

PROBLEMS

157

FIGURE 4.8 Total vote, by county in Florida, for Reform Party candidates Buchanan in 2000 and Perot in 1996.

interpretation: The estimated proportion vote for Buchanan in 2000 was roughly P% of that for Perot in 1996. b. For Palm Beach County, вҗІi s 0.0079 and xi s 0.0774. Does this result appear to be an outlier? Explain.
c. For logistic regression, logwвҗІЛҶirЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.x s y7.164 q 12.219 xi. Find вҗІЛҶi in Palm Beach County. Is that county an outlier for this model?
4.2 For games in baseballвҖҷs National League during nine decades, Table 4.6 shows the percentage of times that the starting pitcher pitched a complete game.

TABLE 4.6 Data for Problem 4.2

Decade

Percent Complete

Decade

Percent Complete

1900бҺҗ1909

72.7

1930бҺҗ1939

44.3

1910бҺҗ1919

63.4

1940бҺҗ1949

41.6

1920бҺҗ1929

50.0

1950бҺҗ1959

32.8

Source: Data from George Will, Newsweek, Apr. 10, 1989.

Decade
1960бҺҗ1969 1970бҺҗ1979 1980бҺҗ1989

Percent Complete
27.2 22.5 13.3

158

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

a. Treating the number of games as the same in each decade, the ML
fit of the linear probability model is вҗІЛҶ s 0.7578 y 0.0694 x, where
x s decade ЕҪ x s 1, 2, . . . , 9.. Interpret 0.7578 and y0.0694.
b. Substituting x s 10, 11, 12, predict the percentages of complete games for the next three decades. Are these predictions plausible? Why?
c. The ML fit with logistic regression is вҗІЛҶ s expЕҪ1.148 y 0.315 x.rw1 q exp ЕҪ1.148 y 0.315 x.x. Obtain вҗІЛҶi for x s 10, 11, 12. Are these
more plausible?

4.3 For Table 3.7 with scores ЕҪ0, 0.5, 1.5, 4.0, 7.0. for alcohol consumption, ML fitting of the linear probability model for malformation has output.

Parameter Intercept Alcohol

Estimate 0.0025 0.0011

Std Error 0.0003 0.0007

Wald 95% Conf Limits 0.0019 0.0032
y0.0003 0.0025

Interpret the model fit. Use it to estimate the relative risk of malformation for alcohol consumption levels 0 and 7.0.
4.4 For Table 4.2, refit the linear probability model or the logistic regression model using the scores ЕҪa. ЕҪ0, 2, 4, 6., ЕҪb. ЕҪ0, 1, 2, 3., and ЕҪc. ЕҪ1, 2,
3, 4.. Compare вҗӨЛҶ for the three choices. Compare fitted values. Sum-
marize the effect of linear transformations of scores, which preserve relative sizes of spacings between scores.
4.5 For Table 4.3, let Y s 1 if a crab has at least one satellite, and Y s 0 otherwise. Using x s weight, fit the linear probability model. a. Use ordinary least squares. Interpret the parameter estimates. Find the estimated probability at the highest observed weight ЕҪ5.20 kg.. Comment. b. Try to fit the model using ML, treating Y as binomial. wThe failure is due to a fitted probability falling outside the ЕҪ0, 1. range. The fit in part ЕҪa. is ML for a normal random component, for which fitted values outside this range are permissible.x c. Fit the logistic regression model. Show that the fitted probability at a weight of 5.20 kg equals 0.9968. d. Fit the probit model. Find the fitted probability at 5.20 kg.
4.6 An experiment analyzes imperfection rates for two processes used to fabricate silicon wafers for computer chips. For treatment A applied to 10 wafers, the numbers of imperfections are 8, 7, 6, 6, 3, 4, 7, 2, 3, 4. Treatment B applied to 10 other wafers has 9, 9, 8, 14, 8, 13, 11, 5, 7, 6

PROBLEMS

159

imperfections. Treat the counts as independent Poisson variates having means вҗ®A and вҗ®B. a. Fit the model log вҗ® s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x, where x s 1 for treatment B and
x s 0 for treatment A. Show that exp ЕҪ вҗӨ . s вҗ®Brвҗ®A, and interpret its estimate. b. Test H0: вҗ®A s вҗ®B with the Wald or likelihood ratio test of H0: вҗӨ s 0. Interpret. c. Construct a 95% confidence interval for вҗ®Brвҗ®A. ЕҪ Hint: First construct one for вҗӨ.. d. Test H0: вҗ®A s вҗ®B based on this result: If Y1 and Y2 are independent Poisson with means вҗ®1 and вҗ®2 , then ЕҪY1 < Y1 q Y2 . is binomial with n s Y1 q Y2 and вҗІ s вҗ®1rЕҪвҗ®1 q вҗ®2 ..
4.7 For Table 4.3, Table 4.7 shows SAS output for a Poisson loglinear model fit using X s weight and Y s number of satellites. a. Estimate EЕҪY . for female crabs of average weight, 2.44 kg.
b. Use вҗӨЛҶ to describe the weight effect. Show how to construct the
reported confidence interval.
c. Construct a Wald test that Y is independent of X. Interpret.
d. Can you conduct a likelihood-ratio test of this hypothesis? If not, what else do you need?
e. Is there evidence of overdispersion? If necessary, adjust standard errors and interpret.

TABLE 4.7 SAS Output for Problem 4.7

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

171

560.8664

Pearson Chi- Square

171

535.8957

Log Likelihood

71.9524

Parameter Estimate Std Error Wald 95% Conf Limits Chi- Sq Pr > ChiSq

Intercept y0.4284 0.1789

y0.7791 y0.0777

5.73 0.0167

weight

0.5893 0.0650

0.4619 0.7167 82.15 <.0001

4.8 Refer to Problem 4.7. Using the identity link with x s weight, вҗ®ЛҶ s y2.60 q 2.264 x, where вҗӨЛҶs 2.264 has SE s 0.228. Repeat parts ЕҪa.
through ЕҪc..
4.9 Refer to Table 4.3. a. Fit a Poisson loglinear model using both W s weight and C s color to predict Y s number of satellites. Assigning dummy variables, treat C as a nominal factor. Interpret parameter estimates.

160

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

b. Estimate EЕҪY . for female crabs of average weight ЕҪ2.44 kg. that are ЕҪi. medium light, and ЕҪii. dark.
c. Test whether color is needed in the model. ЕҪ Hint: From Section 4.5.4, the likelihood-ratio statistic comparing models is the difference in deviances..
d. The estimated color effects are monotone across the four categories. Fit a simpler model that treats C as quantitative and assumes a linear effect. Interpret its color effect and repeat the analyses of parts ЕҪb. and ЕҪc.. Compare the fit to the model in part ЕҪa.. Interpret.
e. Add width to the model. What effect does the strong positive correlation between width and weight have? Are both needed in the model?

4.10 In Section 4.3.2, refer to the Poisson model with identity link. The fit
using least squares is вҗ®ЛҶ s y10.42 q 0.51 x ЕҪSE s 0.11.. Explain why
the parameter estimates differ and why the SE values are so different.

4.11 For the negative binomial model fitted to the crab satellite counts with
log link and width predictor, вҗЈЛҶ s y4.05, вҗӨЛҶs 0.192 ЕҪSE s 0.048., ЛҶky1 s 1.106 ЕҪSE s 0.197.. Interpret. Why is SE for вҗӨЛҶ so different from
SE s 0.020 for the corresponding Poisson GLM in Sec 4.3.2? Which is more appropriate? Why?

4.12 Refer to Problem 4.6. The sample mean and variance are 5.0 and 4.2 for treatment A and 9.0 and 8.4 for treatment B.
a. Is there evidence of overdispersion for the Poisson model having a dummy variable for treatment? Explain.
b. Fit the negative binomial loglinear model. Note that the estimated dispersion parameter is 0 and that estimates of treatment means and standard errors are the same as with the Poisson loglinear GLM.
c. For the overall sample of 20 observations, the sample mean and variance are 7.0 and 10.2. Fit the loglinear model having only an intercept term under Poisson and negative binomial assumptions. Compare results, and compare confidence intervals for the overall mean response. Why do they differ? ЕҪ Note: This shows how the Poisson model can deteriorate when an important covariate is unmeasured..

4.13 Table 4.8 shows the free-throw shooting, by game, of Shaq OвҖҷNeal of the Los Angeles Lakers during the 2000 NBA ЕҪbasketball. playoffs. Commentators remarked that his shooting varied dramatically from game to game. In game i, suppose that Yi s number of free throws

PROBLEMS

161

TABLE 4.8 Data for Problem 4.13

Number Number of

Number Number of

Number Number of

Game Made Attempts Game Made Attempts Game Made Attempts

1

4

5

9

4

12

17

8

12

2

5

11

10

1

4

18

1

6

3

5

14

11

13

27

19

18

39

4

5

12

12

5

17

20

3

13

5

2

7

13

6

12

21

10

17

6

7

10

14

9

9

22

1

6

7

6

14

15

7

12

23

3

12

8

9

15

16

3

10

Source: www.nba.com.

made out of ni attempts is a bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. variate and the Г„Yi4 are independent.
a. Fit the model, вҗІi s вҗЈ , and find and interpret вҗЈЛҶ and its standard
error. Does the model appear to fit adequately? ЕҪ Note: You could check this with a small-sample test of independence of the 23 = 2 table of game and the binary outcome.. b. Adjust the standard error for overdispersion. Using the original SE and its correction, find and compare 95% confidence intervals for вҗЈ. Interpret.
4.14 Refer to Table 13.6. Fit a loglinear model with a dummy variable for race, ЕҪa. assuming a Poisson distribution, and ЕҪb. allowing overdispersion with a quasi-likelihood approach. Compare results.
4.15 Refer to Problem 4.6. The wafers are also classified by thickness of silicon coating ЕҪ z s 0, low; z s 1, high.. The first five imperfection counts reported for each treatment refer to z s 0 and the last five refer to z s 1. Analyze these data.
14.6 Refer to Table 13.9 on frequency of sexual intercourse. Analyze these data.

Theory and Methods
4.17 Describe the purpose of the link function of a GLM. What is the identity link? Explain why it is not often used with binomial or Poisson responses.
4.18 For known k, show that the negative binomial distribution ЕҪ4.12. has exponential family form ЕҪ4.1. with natural parameter logw вҗ®rЕҪвҗ® q k.x.

162

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

4.19 For binary data, define a GLM using the log link. Show that effects refer to the relative risk. Why do you think this link is not often used? ЕҪ Hint: What happens if the linear predictor takes a positive value?.
4.20 For the logistic regression model ЕҪ4.6. with вҗӨ ) 0, show that ЕҪa. as x в„ў Пұ, вҗІ ЕҪ x. is monotone increasing, and ЕҪb. the curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x. is the cdf of a logistic distribution having mean yвҗЈrвҗӨ and standard devia-
tion вҗІrЕҪ вҗӨ '3 ..
4.21 Show representation ЕҪ4.18. for the binomial distribution.
4.22 Let Yi be a bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. variate for group i, i s 1, . . . , N, with Г„Yi4 independent. Consider the model that вҗІ 1 s РёРёРё s вҗІN . Denote that
common value by вҗІ . For observations Г„ yi4, show that вҗІЛҶ s ЕҪГқ yi.rЕҪГқni..
When all ni s 1, for testing this modelвҖҷs fit in the N = 2 table, show that X 2 s n. Thus, goodness-of-fit statistics can be completely uninformative for ungrouped data. ЕҪSee also Problem 5.37..
4.23 Suppose that Yi is Poisson with gЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi, where xi s 1 for i s 1, . . . , nA from group A and xi s 0 for i s nA q 1, . . . , nA q nB from group B. Show that for any link function g, the likelihood
equations ЕҪ4.22. imply that fitted means вҗ®ЛҶA and вҗ®ЛҶ B equal the sample
means.

4.24 For binary data with sample proportion yi based on ni trials, we use quasi-likelihood to fit a model using variance function ЕҪ4.46.. Show that parameter estimates are the same as for the binomial GLM but that the covariance matrix multiplies by вҗҫ.
4.25 A binomial GLM вҗІi s вҢҪЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j. with arbitrary inverse link function вҢҪ assumes$ that niYi has a bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. distribution. Find wi in ЕҪ4.27.
and hence covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ .. For logistic regression, show that wi s niвҗІiЕҪ1 y вҗІi..
4.26 A GLM has parameter вҗӨ with sufficient statistic S. A goodness-of-fit test statistic T has observed value to. If вҗӨ were known, a P-value is P s PЕҪT G to; вҗӨ .. Explain why PЕҪT G to < S. is the uniform minimum variance unbiased estimator of P.

4.27 Let yi j be observation j of a count variable for group i, i s 1, . . . , I, j s 1, . . . , ni. Suppose that Г„Yi j4 are independent Poisson with EЕҪYi j. s вҗ®i.
a. Show that the ML estimate of вҗ®i is вҗ®ЛҶi s yi s Гқj yi jrni.
b. Simplify the expression for the deviance for this model. wFor testing this model, it follows from Fisher ЕҪ1970, p. 58, originally published

PROBLEMS

163

in 1925. that the deviance and the Pearson statistic ГқiГқjЕҪ yi j y yi.2ryi have approximate chi-squared distributions with df s ГқiЕҪ ni y 1.. For a single group, Cochran ЕҪ1954. referred to ГқjЕҪ y1 j y y1.2ry1 as the В®ariance test for the fit of a Poisson distribution, since it
compares the sample variance to the estimated Poisson variance y1.x

4.28 Conditional on вҗӯ, Y has a Poisson distribution with mean вҗӯ. Values of вҗӯ vary according to gamma density ЕҪ13.12., which has EЕҪ вҗӯ. s вҗ®, varЕҪ вҗӯ. s вҗ®2rk. Show that marginally Y has the negative binomial distribution ЕҪ4.12.. Explain why the negative binomial model is a way to handle overdispersion for the Poisson.
4.29 Consider the class of binary models ЕҪ4.8. and ЕҪ4.9.. Suppose that the standard cdf вҢҪ corresponds to a probability density function вҗҫ that is symmetric around 0. a. Show that x at which вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.5 is x s yвҗЈrвҗӨ. b. Show that the rate of change in вҗІ ЕҪ x. when вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.5 is вҗӨвҗҫЕҪ0..
Show this is 0.25вҗӨ for the logit link and вҗӨr'2вҗІ ЕҪwhere вҗІ s 3.14 . . . .
for the probit link. c. Show that the probit regression curve has the shape of a normal cdf
with mean yвҗЈrвҗӨ and standard deviation 1r < вҗӨ < .
4.30 Show the normal distribution NЕҪвҗ®, вҗҙ 2 . with fixed вҗҙ satisfies family ЕҪ4.1., and identify the components. Formulate the ordinary regression model as a GLM.

4.31 In Problem 4.30, when вҗҙ is also a parameter, show that it satisfies the exponential dispersion family ЕҪ4.14..

4.32

For

binary

observations,

consider

the

model

вҗІ ЕҪ x.

s

1 2

q

ЕҪ1rвҗІ .tany1ЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x.. Which distribution has cdf of this form? Explain

when a GLM using this curve might be more appropriate than logistic

regression.

4.33 Find the form of the deviance residual ЕҪ4.35. for an observation in a ЕҪa. binomial GLM, and ЕҪb. Poisson GLM. Illustrate part ЕҪb. for a cell count in a two-way contingency table for the model of independence.

4.34 Consider the value вҗӨЛҶ that maximizes a function LЕҪ вҗӨ .. Let вҗӨ ЕҪ0. denote

an initial guess.

a.

Using

X
L

ЕҪ

вҗӨЛҶ.

s

X
L

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

ЕҪ0.

.

q

ЕҪ

вҗӨЛҶ

y

вҗӨ

ЕҪ0.

.

Y
L

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

ЕҪ0.

.

q

РёРёРё

,

argue

that

for

вҗӨ ЕҪ0.

close

to

вҗӨЛҶ,

approximately

0

s

X
L

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

ЕҪ0.

.

q

ЕҪ

вҗӨЛҶ

y

вҗӨ

ЕҪ0.

.

Y
L

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

ЕҪ0.

..

Solve this equation to obtain an approximation вҗӨ ЕҪ1. for вҗӨЛҶ.

164

INTRODUCTION TO GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS

b. Let вҗӨ ЕҪt. denote approximation t for вҗӨЛҶ, t s 0, 1, 2, . . . . Justify that
the next approximation is

вҗӨ

ЕҪ tq1.

s

вҗӨ

ЕҪt.

y

X
LЕҪ

вҗӨ

ЕҪt.

Y

.rL

ЕҪ

вҗӨ

ЕҪt...

4.35 For n independent observations from a Poisson distribution, show that Fisher scoring gives вҗ®ЕҪtq1. s y for all t ) 0. By contrast, what happens with NewtonбҺҗRaphson?
4.36 Write a computer program using the NewtonбҺҗRaphson algorithm to
maximize the likelihood for a binomial sample. For вҗІЛҶ s 0.3 based on
n s 10, print out results of the first six iterations when the starting value вҗІ ЕҪ0. is ЕҪa. 0.1, ЕҪb. 0.2, . . . , ЕҪi. 0.9. Summarize the effects of the starting value on speed of convergence. What happens if it is 0 or 1?
4.37 In a GLM, suppose that varЕҪY . s В®ЕҪвҗ®. for вҗ® s EЕҪY .. Show that the link g satisfying gXЕҪвҗ®. s w В®ЕҪвҗ®.xy1r2 has the same weight matrix W ЕҪt. at each cycle. Show this link for a Poisson random component is gЕҪвҗ®. s 2
'вҗ® .
4.38 For noncanonical links in a GLM, show that the observed information matrix may depend on the data and hence differs from the expected information. Illustrate using the probit model.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 5
Logistic Regression
In introducing generalized linear models for binary data in Chapter 4 we highlighted logistic regression. This is the most important model for categorical response data. It is used increasingly in a wide variety of applications. Early uses were in biomedical studies but the past 20 years have also seen much use in social science research and marketing.
Recently, logistic regression has become a popular tool in business applications. Some credit-scoring applications use logistic regression to model the probability that a subject is credit worthy. For instance, the probability that a subject pays a bill on time may use predictors such as the size of the bill, annual income, occupation, mortgage and debt obligations, percentage of bills paid on time in the past, and other aspects of an applicantвҖҷs credit history. A company that relies on catalog sales may determine whether to send a catalog to a potential customer by modeling the probability of a sale as a function of indices of past buying behavior.
Another area of increasing application is genetics. For instance, one recent article ЕҪJ. M. Henshall and M. E. Goddard, Genetics 151:885бҺҗ894, 1999. used logistic regression to estimate quantitative trait loci effects, modeling the probability that an offspring inherits an allele of one type instead of another type as a function of phenotypic values on various traits for that offspring. Another recent article ЕҪD. F. Levinson et al., Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 67:652бҺҗ663, 2000. used logistic regression for analysis of the genotype data of affected sibling pairs ЕҪASPs. and their parents from several research centers. The model studied the probability that ASPs have identityby-descent allele sharing and tested its heterogeneity among the centers.
In this chapter we study logistic regression more closely. Section 5.1 covers parameter interpretation. In Section 5.2 we present inferential methods for those parameters. Sections 5.3 and 5.4 generalize to multiple predictors, some of which may be qualitative. Finally, in Section 5.5 we apply GLM model-fitting methods to determine and solve likelihood equations for logistic regression.
165

166

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

5.1 INTERPRETING PARAMETERS IN LOGISTIC REGRESSION For a binary response variable Y and an explanatory variable X, let вҗІ ЕҪ x. s PЕҪY s 1 < X s x. s 1 y PЕҪY s 0 < X s x.. The logistic regression model is

вҗІ ЕҪ x . s exp ЕҪвҗЈ 1 q exp ЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x . . q вҗӨ x .

ЕҪ 5 .1.

Equivalently, the log odds, called the logit, has the linear relationship

logit вҗІ ЕҪ x . s log 1 s вҗІ ЕҪ x . y вҗІ ЕҪ x . вҗЈ q вҗӨ x.

ЕҪ 5 .2.

This equates the logit link function to the linear predictor.

5.1.1 Interpreting вҗӨ: Odds, Probabilities, and Linear Approximations

How can we interpret вҗӨ in ЕҪ5.2.? Its sign determines whether вҗІ ЕҪ x. is

increasing or decreasing as x increases. The rate of climb or descent

increases as < вҗӨ < increases; as вҗӨ в„ў 0 the curve flattens to a horizontal straight

line. When вҗӨ s 0, Y is independent of X. For quantitative x with вҗӨ ) 0, the curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x. has the shape of the cdf of the logistic distribution ЕҪrecall Section 4.2.5.. Since the logistic density is symmetric, вҗІ ЕҪ x. approaches 1 at

the same rate that it approaches 0. Exponentiating both sides of ЕҪ5.2. shows that the odds are an exponential

function of x. This provides a basic interpretation for the magnitude of вҗӨ :

The odds increase multiplicatively by e вҗӨ for every 1-unit increase in x. In

other words, e вҗӨ is an odds ratio, the odds at X s x q 1 divided by the odds

at X s x.

Most scientists are not familiar with odds or logits, so the interpretation of

a multiplicative effect of e вҗӨ on the odds scale or an additive effect of вҗӨ on

the logit scale is not helpful to them. A simpler, although approximate slope interpretation uses a linearization argument ЕҪBerkson 1951.. Since it has a curved rather than a linear appearance, the logistic regression function ЕҪ5.1. implies that the rate of change in вҗІ ЕҪ x. per unit change in x varies. A

straight line drawn tangent to the curve at a particular x value, shown in

Figure 5.1, describes the rate of change at that point. Calculating СЁвҗІ ЕҪ x.rСЁ x

using ЕҪ5.1. yields a fairly complex function of the parameters and x, but it

simplifies to the form вҗӨвҗІ ЕҪ x.w1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x.x.

For instance,

the line tangent

to the curve at

x

for which

вҗІЕҪ

x.

s

1 2

has

slope

вҗӨ

ЕҪ

1 2

.ЕҪ

1 2

.

s

вҗӨr4;

when

вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.9

or

0.1,

it

has

slope

0.09вҗӨ.

The

slope

approaches 0 as вҗІ ЕҪ x. approaches 1.0 or 0. The steepest slope occurs at x for

which вҗІ ЕҪ x. s

21 ; that

x

value is

x s yвҗЈrвҗӨ. wTo check that вҗІ ЕҪ x. s

1 2

at this

INTERPRETING PARAMETERS IN LOGISTIC REGRESSION

167

FIGURE 5.1 Linear approximation to logistic regression curve.

point,

substitute

yвҗЈrвҗӨ

for

x

in

ЕҪ5.1.,

or

substitute

вҗІЕҪ

x.

s

1 2

in

ЕҪ5.2.

and

solve for x.x This x value is sometimes called the median effectiВ®e leВ®el and denoted EL 50 . In toxicology studies it is called LD50 ЕҪLD s lethal dose., the

dose with a 50% chance of a lethal result.

From this

linear

approximation,

near

x

where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s

1 2

,

a

change

in

x

of

1rвҗӨ corresponds to a change in вҗІ ЕҪ x. of roughly ЕҪ1rвҗӨ .ЕҪ вҗӨr4. s 41 ; that

is, 1rвҗӨ approximates the distance between x values where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.25 or

0.75 ЕҪin reality, 0.27 and 0.73. and where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.50. The linear approxima-

tion works better for smaller changes in x, however. An alternative way to interpret the effect reports the values of вҗІ ЕҪ x. at

certain x values, such as their quartiles. This entails substituting those quartiles for x into formula ЕҪ5.1. for вҗІ ЕҪ x.. The change in вҗІ ЕҪ x. over the

middle half of x values, from the lower quartile to the upper quartile of x,

then describes the effect. It can be compared to the corresponding change

over the middle half of values of other predictors.

The intercept parameter вҗЈ is not usually of particular interest. However, by centering the predictor about 0 wi.e., replacing x by ЕҪ x y x.x, вҗЈ becomes the logit at that mean, and thus eвҗЈrЕҪ1 q eвҗЈ . s вҗІ ЕҪ x.. ЕҪAs in ordinary

regression, centering is also helpful in complex models containing quadratic

or interaction terms to reduce correlations among model parameter estimates..

168

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

5.1.2 Looking at the Data
In practice, these interpretations use formula ЕҪ5.1. with ML estimates substituted for parameters. Before fitting the model and making such interpretations, look at the data to check that the logistic regression model is appropriate. Since Y takes only values 0 and 1, it is difficult to check this by plotting Y against x.
It can be helpful to plot sample proportions or logits against x. Let ni denote the number of observations at setting i of x. Of them, let yi denote the number of вҖҳвҖҳ1вҖҷвҖҷ outcomes, with pi s yirni. Sample logit i is logw pirЕҪ1 y pi.x s logw yirЕҪ ni y yi.x. This is not finite when yi s 0 or ni. An ad hoc adjustment adds a positive constant to the number of outcomes of the two types. The adjustment
yi q 21 log ni y yi q 21
is the least-biased estimator of this form of the true logit ЕҪNote 5.2.. The plot of sample logits should be roughly linear.
When X is continuous and all ni s 1, or when it is essentially continuous and all ni are small, this is unsatisfactory. One could group the data with nearby x values into categories before calculating sample proportions and sample logits. A better approach that does not require choosing arbitrary categories uses a smoothing mechanism to reveal trends. One such smoothing approach fits a generalized additive model ЕҪSection 4.8., which replaces the linear predictor of a GLM by a smooth function. Inspect a plot of the fit to see if severe discrepancies occur from the S-shaped trend predicted by logistic regression.

5.1.3 Horseshoe Crabs Revisited
To illustrate logistic regression, we reanalyze the horseshoe crab data introduced in Section 4.3.2. The binary response is whether a female crab has any male crabs residing nearby ЕҪsatellites.: Y s 1 if she has at least one satellite, and Y s 0 if she has none. We first use as a predictor the female crabвҖҷs width.
Figure 4.7 plotted the data and showed the smoothed prediction of the mean provided by a generalized additive model ЕҪGAM., assuming a binomial response and logit link. The logistic regression model appears to be adequate. This is also suggested by the grouping of the data used to investigate the adequacy of Poisson regression models in Section 4.3.2 ЕҪTable 4.4.. In each of the eight width categories, we computed the sample proportion of crabs having satellites and the mean width for the crabs in that category. Figure 5.2 shows eight dots representing the sample proportions of female crabs having satellites plotted against the mean widths for the eight cate-

INTERPRETING PARAMETERS IN LOGISTIC REGRESSION

169

FIGURE 5.2 Observed and fitted proportions of satellites by width of female crab.
gories. The eight plotted sample proportions and the GAM smoothing curve both show a roughly increasing trend, so we proceed with fitting the logistic regression model with linear width predictor.
We defer to Section 5.5 details about ML fitting. Software ЕҪe.g., for SAS see Table A.8. reports output such as Table 5.1 exhibits. For the ungrouped data from Table 4.3, let вҗІ ЕҪ x. denote the probability that a female horseshoe crab of width x has a satellite. The ML fit is
вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x . s expЕҪ 1 q expЕҪy12.351 q 0.497x . . y12.351 q 0.497x .

TABLE 5.1 Computer Output for Logistic Regression Model with Horseshoe Crab Data

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

171

194.4527

Pearson Chi- Square

171

165.1434

Log Likelihood

y97.2263

Parameter Intercept width

Estimate y12.3508
0.4972

Std Error 2.6287 0.1017

Likelihood- Ratio 95% Conf Limits
y17.8097 y7.4573 0.3084 0.7090

Wald Chi- Sq 22.07 23.89

P>ChiSq <.0001 <.0001

170

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

Substituting x s 26.3 cm, the mean width level in this sample, вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. s 0.674.

The estimated

probability equals

1 2

when

xs

yвҗЈЛҶrвҗӨЛҶs 12.351r0.497 s 24.8.

Figure 5.2 plots вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. against width.

The estimated odds of a satellite multiply by expЕҪ вҗӨЛҶ. s expЕҪ0.497. s 1.64

for each 1-cm increase in width; that is, there is a 64% increase. To convey

the effect less technically, we could report the incremental rate of change in
the probability of a satellite. At the mean width, вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. s 0.674, and вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. increases by about вҗӨЛҶwвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x.ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x..x s 0.497ЕҪ0.674.ЕҪ0.326. s 0.11 for a 1-cm increase in width. Or, we could report вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. at the quartiles of x. The

lower quartile, median, and upper quartile for width are 24.9, 26.1, and 27.7;
вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. at those values equals 0.51, 0.65, and 0.81, increasing by 0.30 over the x

values for the middle half of the sample.

The latter summary is useful for comparing the effects of predictors having
different units. For instance, with crab weight as the predictor, logitwвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x.x s

y3.695 q 1.815 x. A 1-kg increase in weight is not comparable to a 1-cm
increase in width, so вҗӨЛҶs 0.497 for x s width is not comparable to вҗӨЛҶs 1.815 for x s weight. The quartiles for weight are 2.00, 2.35, and 2.85; вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. at

those values are 0.48, 0.64, and 0.81, increasing by 0.33 over the middle half

of the sampled weights. The effect is similar to that of width.

5.1.4 Logistic Regression with Retrospective Studies
Another property of logistic regression relates to situations in which the explanatory variable X rather than the response variable Y is random. This occurs with retrospective sampling designs, such as caseбҺҗcontrol biomedical studies ЕҪSection 2.1.6.. For samples of subjects having Y s 1 ЕҪcases. and having Y s 0 ЕҪcontrols., the value of X is observed. Evidence exists of an association if the distribution of X values differs between cases and controls. In retrospective studies, one can estimate odds ratios ЕҪSection 2.2.4.. Effects in the logistic regression model refer to odds ratios. Thus, one can fit such models and estimate effects in caseбҺҗcontrol studies.
Here is a justification for this. Let Z indicate whether a subject is sampled ЕҪ1 s yes, 0 s no.. Let вҗі1 s PЕҪ Z s 1 < y s 1. denote the probability of sampling a case, and let вҗі0 s PЕҪ Z s 1 < y s 0. denote the probability of sampling a control. Even though the conditional distribution of Y given X s x is not sampled, we need a model for PЕҪY s 1 < z s 1, x., assuming that PЕҪY s 1 < x. follows the logistic model. By BayesвҖҷ theorem,

P ЕҪ Y s 1 < z s 1, x . s 1P ЕҪ Z . s 1 < y s 1, x . P ЕҪ Y s 1 < x . Гқjs0 P ЕҪ Z s 1 < y s j, x . P ЕҪ Y s j < x .

ЕҪ 5 .3.

Now, suppose that PЕҪ Z s 1 < y, x. s PЕҪ Z s 1 < y. for y s 0 and 1; that is, for each y, the sampling probabilities do not depend on x. For instance, often x

INTERPRETING PARAMETERS IN LOGISTIC REGRESSION

171

refers to exposure of some type, such as whether someone has been a smoker. Then, for cases and for controls, the probability of being sampled is the same for smokers and nonsmokers. Under this assumption, substituting вҗі1 and вҗі0 in ЕҪ5.3. and dividing numerator and denominator by PЕҪY s 0 < x., ЕҪ5.3. simplifies to
P ЕҪ Y s 1 < z s 1, x . s вҗі1 expЕҪвҗЈ . q вҗӨ x . вҗі0 q вҗі1 expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x .

Then, dividing numerator and denominator by вҗі0 and using expwlogЕҪ вҗі1rвҗі0.x yields
logit P ЕҪ Y s 1 < z s 1, x . s вҗЈ * q вҗӨ x

вҗі1rвҗі0 s

with вҗЈ * s вҗЈ q logЕҪ вҗі1rвҗі0.. Thus, the logistic regression model holds with the same effect parameter вҗӨ
as in the model for PЕҪY s 1 < x.. If the sampling rate for cases is 10 times that for controls, the intercept estimated is logЕҪ10. s 2.3 larger than the one estimated with a prospective study. For related comments, see Anderson ЕҪ1972., Breslow and Day ЕҪ1980, p. 203., Breslow and Powers ЕҪ1978., Carroll et al. ЕҪ1995., Farewell ЕҪ1979., Mantel ЕҪ1973., Prentice ЕҪ1976a., and Prentice and Pyke ЕҪ1979..
With caseбҺҗcontrol studies, one cannot estimate вҗӨ in other binaryresponse models. Unlike the odds ratio, the effect for the conditional distribution of X given Y does not then equal that for Y given X. This is an important advantage of the logit link and is a major reason why logit models have surpassed other models in popularity in biomedical studies.
Many caseбҺҗcontrol studies employ matching. Each case is matched with one or more control subjects. The controls are like the case on key characteristics such as age. The model and subsequent analysis should take the matching into account. In Section 10.2.5 we discuss logistic regression for matched caseбҺҗcontrol studies.
Regardless of the sampling mechanism, logistic regression may or may not describe a relationship well. In one special case, it necessarily holds. Given that Y s i, suppose that X has NЕҪвҗ®i, вҗҙ 2 . distribution, i s 0, 1. Then, by BayesвҖҷ theorem, PЕҪY s 1 < X s x. equals ЕҪ5.1. with вҗӨ s ЕҪвҗ®1 y вҗ®0.rвҗҙ 2 ЕҪCornfield 1962.. When a population is a mixture of two types of subjects, one type with Y s 1 that is approximately normally distributed on X and the other type with Y s 0 that is approximately normal on X with similar variance, the logistic regression function ЕҪ5.1. approximates well the curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x.. If the distributions are normal but with different variances, the model applies also having a quadratic term ЕҪAnderson 1975.. In that case, the relationship is nonmonotone, with вҗІ ЕҪ x. increasing and then decreasing, or the reverse ЕҪProblem 5.33..

172

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

5.2 INFERENCE FOR LOGISTIC REGRESSION
By WaldвҖҷs ЕҪ1943. asymptotic results for ML estimators, parameter estimators in logistic regression models have large-sample normal distributions. Thus, inference can use the ЕҪWald, likelihood-ratio, score. triad of methods ЕҪSection 1.3.3..

5.2.1 Types of Inference For the model with a single predictor,
logit вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x,

significance tests focus on H0: вҗӨ s 0, the hypothesis of independence. The
Wald test uses the log likelihood at вҗӨЛҶ, with test statistic z s вҗӨЛҶrSE or its

square; under H0, z 2 is asymptotically вҗ№12. The likelihood-ratio test uses
twice the difference between the maximized log likelihood at вҗӨЛҶ and at вҗӨ s 0

and also has an asymptotic вҗ№12 null distribution. The score test uses the log likelihood at вҗӨ s 0 through the derivative of the log likelihood ЕҪi.e., the score function. at that point. The test statistic compares the sufficient statistic for вҗӨ to its null expected value, suitably standardized w NЕҪ0, 1. or вҗ№12 x. In Section 5.3.5 present this test of H0: вҗӨ s 0.

For large samples, the three tests usually give similar results. The likeli-

hood-ratio test is preferred over the Wald. It uses more information, since it
incorporates the log likelihood at H0 as well as at вҗӨЛҶ. When < вҗӨ < is relatively

large, the Wald test is not as powerful as the likelihood-ratio test and can even show aberrant behavior wsee Hauck and Donner ЕҪ1977. and Problem

5.38x.

Confidence intervals are more informative than tests. An interval for вҗӨ

results from inverting a test of H0: вҗӨ s вҗӨ0. The interval is the set of вҗӨ0 for

which

the

chi-squared

test

statistic

is

no

greater

than

вҗ№

2 1

ЕҪвҗЈ.

s

2
zвҗЈ

r2

.

For

the

Wald

approach,

this

means

wЕҪ

вҗӨЛҶ

y

вҗӨ0

.rSEx2

F

2
zвҗЈ

r2

;

the

interval

is

вҗӨЛҶ"

zвҗЈ r2 ЕҪSE..

For summarizing the relationship, other characteristics may have greater importance than вҗӨ, such as вҗІ ЕҪ x. at various x values. For fixed x s x0,
logitwвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x0.x s вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx0 has a large-sample SE given by the estimated square

root of

varЕҪвҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx0 . s varЕҪвҗЈЛҶ. q x02 varЕҪвҗӨЛҶ. q 2 x0 covЕҪвҗЈЛҶ, вҗӨЛҶ. .

A 95% confidence interval for logitwвҗІ ЕҪ x0.x is ЕҪвҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx0. " 1.96 SE. Substi-
tuting each endpoint into the inverse transformation вҗІ ЕҪ x0. s exp ЕҪlogit.r w1 q exp ЕҪlogit.x gives a corresponding interval for вҗІ ЕҪ x0..
Each method of inference can also produce small-sample confidence
intervals and tests. We defer discussion of this until Section 6.7.

INFERENCE FOR LOGISTIC REGRESSION

173

5.2.2 Inference for Horseshoe Crab Data

We illustrate logistic regression inferences with the model for the probability
a horseshoe crab has a satellite, with width as the predictor. Table 5.1
showed the fit and standard errors. The statistic z s вҗӨЛҶrSE s 0.497r0.102 s
4.9 provides strong evidence of a positive width effect ЕҪ P - 0.0001.. The equivalent Wald chi-squared statistic, z 2 s 23.9, has df s 1. The maximized log likelihoods equal y112.88 under H0: вҗӨ s 0 and y97.23 for the full model. The likelihood-ratio statistic equals y2ЕҪy112.88 y 97.23. s 31.3,
with df s 1. This provides even stronger evidence than the Wald test. The Wald 95% confidence interval for вҗӨ is 0.497 " 1.96ЕҪ0.102., or ЕҪ0.298,
0.697.. Table 5.1 reports a likelihood-ratio confidence interval of ЕҪ0.308, 0.709., based on the profile likelihood function. The confidence interval for the effect on the odds per 1-cm increase in width equals ЕҪ e0.308 , e0.709 . s ЕҪ1.36, 2.03.. We infer that a 1-cm increase in width has at least a 36%
increase and at most a doubling in the odds of a satellite.
Most software for logistic regression also reports estimates and confidence intervals for вҗІ ЕҪ x. ЕҪe.g., PROC GENMOD in SAS with the OBSTATS option.. Consider this for crabs of width x s 26.5, near the mean width. The
estimated logit is y12.351 q 0.497ЕҪ26.5. s 0.825, and вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. s 0.695. Soft-
ware reports

$
varЕҪвҗЈЛҶ. s 6.910,

var $ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ. s 0.01035,

cov $ЕҪвҗЈЛҶ, вҗӨЛҶ. s y0.2668,

from which
var $Г„logit вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x . 4 s 6.910 q x 2 ЕҪ0.01035. q 2 x ЕҪy0.2668. .
At x s 26.5 this is 0.038, so the 95% confidence interval for logitwвҗІ ЕҪ26.5.x
equals 0.825 " ЕҪ1.96.'0.038 , or ЕҪ0.44, 1.21.. This translates to the interval
ЕҪ0.61, 0.77. for the probability of satellites ЕҪe.g., exp ЕҪ0.44.rw1 q exp ЕҪ0.44.x s
0.61.. ЕҪAlternatively, for the model fit using predictor x* s x y 26.5, вҗЈЛҶ and
its SE are the estimated logit and its SE.. Figure 5.3 plots the confidence bands around the prediction equation for вҗІ ЕҪ x. as a function of x. Hauck ЕҪ1983. gave alternative bands for which the confidence coefficient applies simultaneously to all possible predictor values.
One could ignore the model fit and simply use sample proportions ЕҪi.e., the saturated model. to estimate such probabilities. Six female crabs in the sample had x s 26.5, and four of them had satellites. The sample proportion
estimate at x s 26.5 is вҗІЛҶ s 4r6 s 0.67, similar to the model-based estimate.
The 95% score confidence interval ЕҪSection 1.4.2. based on these six observations alone equals ЕҪ0.30, 0.90..
When the logistic regression model truly holds, the model-based estimator of a probability is considerably better than the sample proportion. The model has only two parameters to estimate, whereas the saturated model has a

174

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

FIGURE 5.3 Prediction equation and 95% confidence bands for probability of satellite as a function of width.
separate parameter for every distinct value of x. For instance, at x s 26.5, software reports SE s 0.04 for the model-based estimate 0.695, whereas the
SE is 'вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . rn s 'ЕҪ0.67. ЕҪ0.33. r6 s 0.19 for the sample proportion
of 0.67 with only 6 observations. The 95% confidence intervals are ЕҪ0.61, 0.77. using the model versus ЕҪ0.30, 0.90. using the sample proportion. Instead of using only 6 observations, the model uses the information that all 173 observations provide in estimating the two model parameters. The result is a much more precise estimate.
Reality is a bit more complicated. In practice, the model is not exactly the true relationship between вҗІ ЕҪ x. and x. However, if it approximates the true probabilities decently, its estimator still tends to be closer than the sample proportion to the true value. The model smooths the sample data, somewhat dampening the observed variability. The resulting estimators tend to be better unless each sample proportion is based on an extremely large sample. Section 6.4.5 discusses this advantage of using models.
5.2.3 Checking Goodness of Fit: Ungrouped and Grouped Data
In practice, there is no guarantee that a certain logistic regression model fits the data well. For any type of binary data, one way to detect lack of fit uses a likelihood-ratio test to compare the model to more complex ones. A more complex model might contain a nonlinear effect, such as a quadratic term. Models with multiple predictors would consider interaction. If more complex models do not fit better, this provides some assurance that the model chosen is reasonable.

INFERENCE FOR LOGISTIC REGRESSION

175

Other approaches to detecting lack of fit search for any way that the model fails. This is simplest when the explanatory variables are solely categorical, as weвҖҷll illustrate in Section 5.4.3. At each setting of x, one can multiply the estimated probabilities of the two outcomes by the number of subjects at that setting to obtain estimated expected frequencies for y s 0 and y s 1. These are fitted В®alues. The test of the model compares the observed counts and fitted values using a Pearson X 2 or likelihood-ratio G2 statistic. For a fixed number of settings, as the fitted counts increase, X 2 and G2 have limiting chi-squared null distributions. The degrees of freedom, called the residual df for the model, subtract the number of parameters in the model from the number of parameters in the saturated model ЕҪi.e., the number of settings of x..
The reason for the restriction to categorical predictors for a global test of fit relates to the distinction in Section 4.5.3 that we mentioned between grouped and ungrouped data for binomial models. The saturated model differs in the two cases. An asymptotic chi-squared distribution for the deviance results as n в„ў Пұ with a fixed number of parameters in that model and hence a fixed number of settings of predictor values.

5.2.4 Goodness of Fit of Model for Horseshoe Crabs
We illustrate with a goodness-of-fit analysis for the model using x s width to predict the probability that a female crab has a satellite. One way to check it compares it to a more complex model, such as the model containing a quadratic term. With width centered at 0 by subtracting its mean of 26.3, that model has fit
logit вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x . s 0.618 q 0.533 x q 0.040 x 2 .
The quadratic estimate has SE s 0.046. There is not much evidence to support adding that term. The likelihood-ratio statistic for testing that the true coefficient of x 2 is 0 equals 0.83 ЕҪdf s 1..
We next consider overall goodness of fit. Width takes 66 distinct values for the 173 crabs, with few observations at most widths. One can view the data as a 66 = 2 contingency table. The two cells in each row count the number of crabs with satellites and the number of crabs without satellites, at that width. The chi-squared theory for X 2 and G2 applies when the number of levels of x is fixed, and the number of observations at each level grows. Although we grouped the data using the distinct width values rather than using 173 separate binary responses, this theory is violated here in two ways. First, most fitted counts are very small. Second, when more data are collected, additional width values would occur, so the contingency table would contain more cells rather than a fixed number. Because of this, X 2 and G2 for logistic regression models with continuous or nearly continuous predictors do not have approximate chi-squared distributions. ЕҪNormal approximations can be

176

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

TABLE 5.2 Grouping of Observed and Fitted Values for Fit of Logistic Regression Model to Horseshoe Crab Data

Width ЕҪcm.

Number Yes

Number No

Fitted Yes

- 23.25

5

23.25бҺҗ24.25

4

24.25бҺҗ25.25

17

25.25бҺҗ26.25

21

26.25бҺҗ27.25

15

27.25бҺҗ28.25

20

28.25бҺҗ29.25

15

) 29.25

14

9

3.64

10

5.31

11

13.78

18

24.23

7

15.94

4

19.38

3

15.65

0

13.08

Fitted No
10.36 8.69 14.22 14.77 6.06 4.62 2.35 0.92

more appropriate, but no single method has received much attention; see Section 9.8.6 for references..
One could use X 2 and G2 to compare the observed and fitted values in grouped form. Table 5.2 uses the groupings of Table 4.4, giving an 8 = 2 table. In each width category, the fitted value for a yes response is the sum of
the estimated probabilities вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. for all crabs having width in that category; the fitted value for a no response is the sum of 1 y вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. for those crabs. The
fitted values are then much larger. Then, X 2 and G2 have better validity, although the chi-squared theory still is not perfect since вҗІ ЕҪ x. is not constant in each category. Their values are X 2 s 5.3 and G2 s 6.2. Table 5.2 has eight binomial samples, one for each width setting; the model has two parameters, so df s 8 y 2 s 6. Neither X 2 nor G2 shows evidence of lack of fit ЕҪ P ) 0.4.. Thus, we can feel more comfortable about using the model for the original ungrouped data.
5.2.5 Checking Goodness of Fit with Ungrouped Data by Grouping
As just noted, with ungrouped data or with continuous or nearly continuous predictors, X 2 and G2 do not have limiting chi-squared distributions. They are still useful for comparing models, as done above for checking a quadratic term and as we will discuss in Sections 5.4.3 and 9.8.5. Also, as just noted, one can apply them in an approximate manner to grouped observed and fitted values for a partition of the space of x values. As the number of explanatory variables increases, however, simultaneous grouping of values for each variable can produce a contingency table with a large number of cells, most of which have small counts.
Regardless of the number of predictors, one can partition observed and fitted values according to the estimated probabilities of success using the original ungrouped data. One common approach forms the groups in the partition so they have approximately equal size. With 10 groups, the first pair

LOGIT MODELS WITH CATEGORICAL PREDICTORS

177

of observed counts and corresponding fitted counts refers to the nr10 observations having the highest estimated probabilities, the next pair refers to the nr10 observations having the second decile of estimated probabilities, and so on. Each group has an observed count of subjects with each outcome and a fitted value for each outcome. The fitted value for an outcome is the sum of the estimated probabilities for that outcome for all observations in that group.
This construction is the basis of a test due to Hosmer and Lemeshow ЕҪ1980.. They proposed a Pearson statistic comparing the observed and fitted counts for this partition. Let yi j denote the binary outcome for observation j
in group i of the partition, i s 1, . . . , g, j s 1, . . . , ni. Let вҗІЛҶi j denote the
corresponding fitted probability for the model fitted to the ungrouped data. Their statistic equals

g ЕҪГқj yi j y ГқjвҗІЛҶi j .2

Гқ

.

is1 ЕҪГқjвҗІЛҶi j . 1 y ЕҪГқjвҗІЛҶi j .rni

When many observations have the same estimated probability, there is some arbitrariness in forming the groups, and different software may report somewhat different values. This statistic does not have a limiting chi-squared distribution, because the observations in a group are not identical trials, since they do not share a common success probability. However, Hosmer and Lemeshow noted that when the number of distinct patterns of covariate values equals the sample size, the null distribution is approximated by chi-squared with df s g y 2.
For the logistic regression fit to the horseshoe crab data with continuous width predictor, the HosmerбҺҗLemeshow statistic with g s 10 groups equals 3.5, with df s 8. It also indicates a decent fit.
Unfortunately, like other proposed global fit statistics, the HosmerбҺҗ Lemeshow statistic does not have good power for detecting particular types of lack of fit ЕҪHosmer et al. 1997.. In any case, a large value of a global fit statistic merely indicates some lack of fit but provides no insight about its nature. The approach of comparing the working model to a more complex one is more useful from a scientific perspective, since it searches for lack of fit of a particular type. For either approach, when the fit is poor, diagnostic measures describe the influence of individual observations on the model fit and highlight reasons for the inadequacy. We discuss these in Section 6.2.1.

5.3 LOGIT MODELS WITH CATEGORICAL PREDICTORS
Like ordinary regression, logistic regression extends to include qualitative explanatory variables, often called factors. In this section we use dummy variables to do this.

178

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

5.3.1 ANOVA-Type Representation of Factors
For simplicity, we first consider a single factor X, with I categories. In row i of the I = 2 table, yi is the number of outcomes in the first column ЕҪsuccesses. out of ni trials. We treat yi as binomial with parameter вҗІi.
The logit model with a factor is

log вҗІi s вҗЈ q вҗӨi . 1 y вҗІi

ЕҪ 5 .4.

The higher вҗӨi is, the higher the value of вҗІi. The right-hand side of ЕҪ5.4. resembles the model formula for cell means in one-way ANOVA. As in ANOVA, the factor has as many parameters Г„ вҗӨi4 as categories, but one is redundant. With I categories, X has I y 1 nonredundant parameters. One parameter can be set to 0, say вҗӨI s 0. If the values do not satisfy this, we can
recode so that it is true. For instance, set вҗӨЛңi s вҗӨi y вҗӨI and вҗЈЛң s вҗЈ q вҗӨI , which satisfy вҗӨЛңI s 0. Then
logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ q вҗӨi s ЕҪвҗЈЛң y вҗӨI . q ЕҪвҗӨЛңi q вҗӨI . s вҗЈЛң q вҗӨЛңi ,

where the newly defined parameters satisfy the constraint. When вҗӨI s 0, вҗЈ equals the logit in row I, and вҗӨi is the difference between the logits in rows i and I. Thus, вҗӨi equals the log odds ratio for that pair of rows.
For any Г„вҗІi ) 04, Г„ вҗӨi4 exist such that model ЕҪ5.4. holds. The model has as many parameters ЕҪ I . as binomial observations and is saturated. When a
factor has no effect, вҗӨ1 s вҗӨ2 s РёРёРё s вҗӨI. Since this is equivalent to вҗІ 1 s РёРёРё s вҗІI , this model with only an intercept term specifies statistical independence of X and Y.

5.3.2 Dummy Variables in Logit Models An equivalent expression of model ЕҪ5.4. uses dummy В®ariables. Let xi s 1 for observations in row i and xi s 0 otherwise, i s 1, . . . , I y 1. The model is
logitЕҪ вҗІ i . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 x1 q вҗӨ2 x2 q РёРёРё qвҗӨIy1 xIy1 .
This accounts for parameter redundancy by not forming a dummy variable for category I. The constraint вҗӨI s 0 in ЕҪ5.4. corresponds to this form of dummy variable. The choice of category to exclude for the dummy variable is arbitrary. Some software sets вҗӨ1 s 0; this corresponds to a model with dummy variables for categories 2 through I, but not category 1.
Another way to impose constraints sets Гқi вҗӨi s 0. Suppose that X has I s 2 categories, so вҗӨ1 s yвҗӨ2. This results from effect coding for a dummy variable, x s 1 in category 1 and x s y1 in category 2.

LOGIT MODELS WITH CATEGORICAL PREDICTORS

179

The same substantive results occur for any coding scheme. For model
ЕҪ5.4., regardless of the constraint for Г„ вҗӨi4, Г„вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶi4 and hence Г„вҗІЛҶi4 are the same. The differences вҗӨЛҶa y вҗӨЛҶb for pairs ЕҪ a, b. of categories of X are identical and represent estimated log odds ratios. Thus, expЕҪ вҗӨЛҶa y вҗӨЛҶb. is the
estimated odds of success in category a of X divided by the estimated odds
of success in category b of X. Reparameterizing a model may change
parameter estimates but does not change the model fit or the effects of
interest.
The value вҗӨi or вҗӨЛҶi for a single category is irrelevant. Different constraint
systems result in different values. For a binary predictor, for instance, using dummy variables with reference value вҗӨ2 s 0, the log odds ratio equals вҗӨ1 y вҗӨ2 s вҗӨ1; by contrast, for effect coding with "1 dummy variable and hence вҗӨ1 q вҗӨ2 s 0, the log odds ratio equals вҗӨ1 y вҗӨ2 s вҗӨ1 y ЕҪyвҗӨ1. s 2 вҗӨ1. A parameter or its estimate makes sense only by comparison with one for
another category.

5.3.3 Alcohol and Infant Malformation Example Revisited
We return now to Table 3.7 from the study of maternal alcohol consumption and childвҖҷs congenital malformations, shown again in Table 5.3. For model ЕҪ5.4., we treat malformations as the response and alcohol consumption as an
explanatory factor. Regardless of the constraint for Г„ вҗӨi4, Г„вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶi4 are the
sample logits, reported in Table 5.3. For instance,
logitЕҪ вҗІЛҶ 1 . s вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶ1 s logЕҪ48r17,066. s y5.87.
For the coding that constrains вҗӨ5 s 0, вҗЈЛҶ s y3.61 and вҗӨЛҶ1 s y2.26. For the coding вҗӨ1 s 0, вҗЈЛҶ s y5.87. Table 5.3 shows that except for the slight
reversal between the first and second categories of alcohol consumption, the logits and hence the sample proportions of malformation cases increase as alcohol consumption increases.
The simpler model with all вҗӨi s 0 specifies independence. For it, вҗЈЛҶ
equals the logit for the overall sample proportion of malformations, or logЕҪ93r32481. s y5.86. To test H0: independence ЕҪdf s 4., the Pearson

TABLE 5.3 Logits and Proportion of Malformation for Table 3.7

Alcohol Consumption

Present

Absent

Logit

Proportion Malformed

Observed

Fitted

0

48

17,066

y5.87

0.0028

0.0026

-1

38

14,464

y5.94

0.0026

0.0030

1бҺҗ2

5

788

y5.06

0.0063

0.0041

3бҺҗ5

1

126

y4.84

0.0079

0.0091

G6

1

37

y3.61

0.0263

0.0231

180

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

statistic ЕҪ3.10. is X 2 s 12.1 ЕҪ P s 0.02., and the likelihood-ratio statistic ЕҪ3.11. is G2 s 6.2 ЕҪ P s 0.19.. These provide mixed signals. Table 5.3 has a
mixture of very small, moderate, and extremely large counts. Even though n s 32,574, the null sampling distributions of X 2 or G2 may not be close to chi-squared. The P-values using the exact conditional distributions of X 2 and G2 are 0.03 and 0.13. These are closer, but still give differing evidence.
In any case, these statistics ignore the ordinality of alcohol consumption. The
sample suggests that malformations may tend to be more likely with higher
alcohol consumption. The first two percentages are similar and the next two
are also similar, however, and any of the last three percentages changes
substantially with the addition or deletion of one malformation case.

5.3.4 Linear Logit Model for I = 2 Tables
Model ЕҪ5.4. treats the explanatory factor as nominal, since it is invariant to the ordering of categories. For ordered factor categories, other models are more parsimonious than this, yet more complex than the independence model. For instance, let scores Г„ x1, x2 , . . . , xI4 describe distances between categories of X. When one expects a monotone effect of X on Y, it is natural to fit the linear logit model

logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .

ЕҪ 5 .5.

The independence model is the special case вҗӨ s 0.
The near-monotone increase in sample logits in Table 5.3 indicates that the linear logit model ЕҪ5.5. may fit better than the independence model. As
measured, alcohol consumption groups a naturally continuous variable. With scores Г„ x1 s 0, x2 s 0.5, x3 s 1.5, x4 s 4.0, x5 s 7.04, the last score being somewhat arbitrary, Table 5.4 shows results. The estimated multiplicative

TABLE 5.4 Computer Output for Logistic Regression Model with Infant Malformation Data

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

3

1.9487

Pearson Chi- Square

3

2.0523

Log Likelihood

y635.5968

Parameter Intercept alcohol

Estimate y5.9605
0.3166

Std Error 0.1154 0.1254

Likelihood- Ratio 95% Conf Limits
y6.1930 y5.7397 0.0187 0.5236

Wald Chi- Sq 2666.41
6.37

Pr>ChiSq <.0001 0.0116

LOGIT MODELS WITH CATEGORICAL PREDICTORS

181

effect of a unit increase in daily alcohol consumption on the odds of malformation is expЕҪ0.317. s 1.37. Table 5.3 shows the observed and fitted
proportions of malformation. The model seems to fit well, as statistics comparing observed and fitted counts are G2 s 1.95 and X 2 s 2.05, with
df s 3.

5.3.5 CochranвҖ“Armitage Trend Test
Armitage ЕҪ1955. and Cochran ЕҪ1954. were among the first to emphasize the importance of utilizing ordered categories in a contingency table. For I = 2 tables with ordered rows and I independent bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. variates Г„ yi4, they proposed a trend statistic for testing independence by partitioning the Pearson statistic for that hypothesis. They used a linear probability model,

вҗІi s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi,

ЕҪ 5 .6.

fitted by ordinary least squares. For this model, the null hypothesis of independence is H0: вҗӨ s 0. Let x s Гқi ni xirn. Let pi s yirni, and let p s ЕҪГқi yi.rn denote the overall proportion of successes. The prediction equation is
вҗІЛҶi s p q bЕҪ xi y x . ,

where

Гқi ni ЕҪ pi y p. ЕҪ xi y x . b s ГқiniЕҪ xi y x.2 .

Denote the Pearson statistic for testing independence by X 2ЕҪ I .. For I = 2 tables with ordered rows, it satisfies

X 2 ЕҪ I . s 1 Гқ ni ЕҪ pi y p. 2 s z 2 q X 2 ЕҪ L. ,
pЕҪ1 y p. i

where

X 2 ЕҪ L. s 1 Гқ ni ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi . 2
pЕҪ1 y p. i

' 2 b 2 2

zs

Гқ niЕҪ xi y x. s

pЕҪ1 y p. i

Гқi ЕҪ xi y x . yi

2
. ЕҪ5.7.

2

pЕҪ1 y p.ГқiniЕҪ xi y x.

When the linear probability model holds, X 2ЕҪ L. is asymptotically chi-squared with df s I y 2. It tests the fit of the model. The statistic z 2, with df s 1,

182

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

tests H0: вҗӨ s 0 for the linear trend in the proportions ЕҪ5.6.. The test of independence using this statistic is called the CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test.
This analysis seems unrelated to the linear logit model. However, the CochranбҺҗArmitage statistic is equivalent to the score statistic for testing H0: вҗӨ s 0 in that model. Moreover, this statistic relates to the statistic M 2 in ЕҪ3.15. used to test for a linear trend in an I = J table; namely, it equals M 2 applied when J s 2, except with ЕҪ n y 1. replaced by n. When I s 2, X 2ЕҪ L. s 0 and z 2 s X 2ЕҪ I ..
For Table 5.3 on alcohol consumption and malformation, X 2ЕҪ I . s 12.1. Using the same scores as in the linear logit model, the CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test has z 2 s 6.6 ЕҪ P-value s 0.010.. The test suggests strong evidence
of a positive slope. In addition,

X 2 ЕҪ I . s 12.1 s 6.6 q 5.5,

where X 2ЕҪ L. s 5.5 ЕҪdf s 3. shows only slight evidence of departure of the proportions from linearity. The trend test agrees with M 2 for the sample correlation of r s 0.014 for n s 32,573 ЕҪSection 3.4.5.. For the chosen scores, the correlation seems weak. However, r has limited use as a descriptive measure for tables that are highly discrete and unbalanced.
The CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test ЕҪi.e., the score test. usually gives results similar to the Wald or likelihood-ratio test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 in the linear logit model. The asymptotics work well even for quite small n when Г„ni4 are equal and Г„ xi4 are equally spaced. With Table 5.3, the Wald statistic equals
ЕҪ вҗӨЛҶrSE.2 s ЕҪ0.317r0.125.2 s 6.4 ЕҪ P s 0.012. and the likelihood-ratio statis-
tic equals 4.25 ЕҪ P s 0.039.. The highly unbalanced counts suggest that it is safest to use the likelihood function through the likelihood-ratio approach. This is also true for estimation. The profile likelihood 95% confidence interval of ЕҪ0.02, 0.52. for вҗӨ reported in Table 5.4 is preferable to the Wald interval of 0.317 " 1.96ЕҪ0.125. s ЕҪ0.07, 0.56.. Even though n is very large, exact inference based on small-sample methods presented in Section 6.7.4 is relevant here.

5.4 MULTIPLE LOGISTIC REGRESSION

Like ordinary regression, logistic regression extends to models with multiple explanatory variables. For instance, the model for вҗІ ЕҪx. s PЕҪY s 1. at values x s ЕҪ x1, . . . , x p. of p predictors is

logit вҗІ ЕҪx. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 x1 q вҗӨ2 x2 q РёРёРё qвҗӨp x p .

ЕҪ 5 .8.

MULTIPLE LOGISTIC REGRESSION

183

The alternative formula, directly specifying вҗІ ЕҪx., is
вҗІ ЕҪx. s expЕҪвҗЈ . q вҗӨ1 x1 q вҗӨ2 x2 q РёРёРё qвҗӨp x p . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ1 x1 q вҗӨ2 x2 q РёРёРё qвҗӨp x p .

ЕҪ 5 .9.

The parameter вҗӨi refers to the effect of xi on the log odds that Y s 1, controlling the other x j. For instance, expЕҪ вҗӨi. is the multiplicative effect on the odds of a 1-unit increase in xi, at fixed levels of other x j. An explanatory variable can be qualitative, using dummy variables for categories.

5.4.1 Logit Models for Multiway Contingency Tables

When all variables are categorical, a multiway contingency table displays the data. We illustrate ideas with binary predictors X and Z. We treat the sample size at given combinations ЕҪi, k. of X and Z as fixed and regard the two counts on Y at each setting as binomial, with different binomials treated as independent. Denote the two categories for each variable by ЕҪ0, 1., and let dummy variables for X and Z have x1 s z1 s 1 and x2 s z2 s 0. The model

logit P ЕҪ Y s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 xi q вҗӨ2 zk

ЕҪ 5 .10.

has main effects for X and Z but assumes an absence of interaction. The
effect of one factor is the same at each level of the other.
At a fixed level zk of Z, the effect on the logit of changing categories of X is

вҗЈ q вҗӨ1ЕҪ1. q вҗӨ2 zk y вҗЈ q вҗӨ1ЕҪ0. q вҗӨ2 zk s вҗӨ1.

ЕҪ 5 .11.

This logit difference equals the difference of log odds, which is the log odds ratio between X and Y, fixing Z. Thus, expЕҪ вҗӨ1. is the conditional odds ratio between X and Y. Controlling for Z, the odds of success when X s 1 equal expЕҪ вҗӨ1. times the odds when X s 0. This conditional odds ratio is the same at each level of Z; that is, there is homogeneous XY association ЕҪSection 2.3.5.. The lack of an interaction term in ЕҪ5.10. implies a common odds ratio for the partial tables. When вҗӨ1 s 0, that common odds ratio equals 1. Then X and Y are independent in each partial table, or conditionally independent, giВ®en Z ЕҪSection 2.3.4..
Additivity on the logit scale is the generally accepted definition of no interaction for categorical variables. However, one could, instead, define it as additivity on some other scale, such as with probit or identity link. Significant interaction can occur on one scale when there is none on another scale. In some applications, a particular definition may be natural. For instance, theory might assume an underlying normal distribution and predict that the probit is an additive function of predictor effects.

184

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

A factor with I categories needs I y 1 dummy variables, as we showed in Section 5.3.2. An alternative representation of such factors resembles the way that ANOVA models often express them. The model formula

logit P ЕҪ Y s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨiX q вҗӨkZ

ЕҪ 5 .11.

represents effects of X with parameters Г„ вҗӨiX 4 and effects of Z with parame-

ters

Г„

вҗӨ

Z k

4.

ЕҪThe

X

and

Z

superscripts

are

merely

labels

and

do

not

represent

powers.. Model form ЕҪ5.11. applies for any number of categories for X and

Z. The parameter вҗӨiX denotes the effect on the logit of classification in

category i of X. Conditional independence between X and Y, given Z,

corresponds

to

вҗӨ1X

s

вҗӨ

X 2

s

РёРёРё

s вҗӨIX,

whereby

PЕҪY s 1.

does

not

change

as

i changes. For each factor, one parameter in ЕҪ5.11. is redundant. Fixing one at 0,

such as вҗӨIX s вҗӨKZ s 0, represents the category not having its own dummy

variable. When X and Z have two categories, the parameterization in model ЕҪ5.11. then corresponds to that in model ЕҪ5.10. with вҗӨ1X s вҗӨ1 and вҗӨ2X s 0, and with вҗӨ1Z s вҗӨ2 and вҗӨ2Z s 0.

5.4.2 AIDS and AZT Example
Table 5.5 is from a study on the effects of AZT in slowing the development of AIDS symptoms. In the study, 338 veterans whose immune systems were beginning to falter after infection with the AIDS virus were randomly assigned either to receive AZT immediately or to wait until their T cells showed severe immune weakness. Table 5.5 cross-classifies the veteransвҖҷ race, whether they received AZT immediately, and whether they developed AIDS symptoms during the 3-year study.
In model ЕҪ5.10., we identify X with AZT treatment ЕҪ x1 s 1 for immediate AZT use, x2 s 0 otherwise. and Z with race ЕҪ z1 s 1 for whites, z2 s 0 for blacks., for predicting the probability that AIDS symptoms developed. Thus, вҗЈ is the log odds of developing AIDS symptoms for black subjects without immediate AZT use, вҗӨ1 is the increment to the log odds for those with immediate AZT use, and вҗӨ2 is the increment to the log odds for white

TABLE 5.5 Development of AIDS Symptoms by AZT Use and Race

Symptoms

Race

AZT Use

Yes

No

White Black

Yes

14

93

No

32

81

Yes

11

52

No

12

43

Source: New York Times, Feb. 15, 1991.

MULTIPLE LOGISTIC REGRESSION

185

TABLE 5.6 Computer Output for Logit Model with AIDS Symptoms Data

Goodness- of- Fit Statistics

Criterion

DF

Value

Pr ) ChiSq

Deviance

1

1.3835

0.2395

Pearson

1

1.3910

0.2382

Parameter Intercept azt race

Analysis of Maximum Likelihood Estimates

Estimate Std Error Wald Chi- Square

y1.0736

0.2629

16.6705

y0.7195

0.2790

6.6507

0.0555

0.2886

0.0370

Pr > ChiSq - .0001 0.0099
0.8476

Effect azt race

Odds Ratio Estimates

Estimate 95% Wald Confidence Limits

0.487

0.282

0.841

1.057

0.600

1.861

Profile Likelihood Confidence Interval for Odds Ratios

Effect

Estimate

95% Confidence Limits

azt

0.487

0.279

0.835

race

1.057

0.605

1.884

Obs race

azt

y

n

piбҺҗhat

lower

upper

1

1

1

14

107

0.14962

0.09897

0.21987

2

1

0

32

113

0.26540

0.19668

0.34774

3

0

1

11

63

0.14270

0.08704

0.22519

4

0

0

12

55

0.25472

0.16953

0.36396

subjects. Table 5.6 shows output. The estimated odds ratio between immediate AZT use and development of AIDS symptoms equals expЕҪy0.7195. s 0.487. For each race, the estimated odds of symptoms are half as high for those who took AZT immediately. The Wald confidence interval for this effect is expwy0.720 " 1.96ЕҪ0.279.x s ЕҪ0.28, 0.84.. Similar results occur for the likelihood-based interval.
The hypothesis of conditional independence of AZT treatment and development of AIDS symptoms, controlling for race, is H0: вҗӨ1 s 0 in ЕҪ5.10.. The likelihood-ratio statistic comparing model ЕҪ5.10. with the simpler model having вҗӨ1 s 0 equals 6.9 ЕҪdf s 1., showing evidence of association ЕҪ P s 0.01..
The Wald statistic ЕҪ вҗӨЛҶ1rSE.2 s ЕҪy0.720r0.279.2 s 6.65 provides similar re-
sults. Table 5.7 shows parameter estimates for three ways of defining factor
parameters in ЕҪ5.11.: ЕҪ1. setting the last parameter equal to 0, ЕҪ2. setting the first parameter equal to 0, and ЕҪ3. having parameters sum to zero. For each coding scheme, at a given combination of AZT use and race, the estimated probability of developing AIDS symptoms is the same. For instance, the intercept estimate plus the estimate for immediate AZT use plus the estimate for being white is y1.738 for each scheme, so the estimated probability

186

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

TABLE 5.7 Parameter Estimates for Logit Model Fitted to Table 5.5

Definition of Parameters

Parameter

Last s Zero

First s Zero

Sum s Zero

Intercept
AZT Yes No
Race White Black

y1.074
y0.720 0.000
0.055 0.000

y1.738
0.000 0.720
0.000 y0.055

y1.406
y0.360 0.360
0.028 y0.028

FIGURE 5.4 Estimated effects of AZT use and race on probability of developing AIDS symptoms ЕҪdots are sample proportions..

that white veterans with immediate AZT use develop AIDS symptoms equals expЕҪy1.738.rw1 q expЕҪy1.738.x s 0.15. The bottom of Table 5.6 shows point

and interval estimates of the probabilities. Figure 5.4 shows a graphical representation of the sample proportions ЕҪthe four dots. and the point

estimates enclosed in 95% confidence intervals.

Similarly, for each coding scheme, вҗӨ X1 y вҗӨ X2 is identical and represents

the conditional log odds ratio of X with the response, given Z. Here,

exp ЕҪ

вҗӨЛҶ X
1

y

вҗӨЛҶ X
2

.

s

exp ЕҪy0.720.

s

0.49

estimates

the

common

odds

ratio

be-

tween immediate AZT use and AIDS symptoms, for each race.

5.4.3 Goodness of Fit as a Likelihood-Ratio Test
The likelihood-ratio statistic y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. tests whether certain model parameters are zero by comparing the log likelihood L1 for the fitted model M1 with L0 for a simpler model M0. Denote this statistic for testing M0, given

MULTIPLE LOGISTIC REGRESSION

187

that M1 holds, by G2ЕҪ M0 < M1.. The goodness-of-fit statistic G2ЕҪ M . is a special case in which M0 s M and M1 is the saturated model. In testing whether M fits, we test whether all parameters in the saturated model but not in M equal zero. The asymptotic df is the difference in the number of parameters in the two models, which is the number of binomials modeled minus the number of parameters in M.
We illustrate by checking the fit of model ЕҪ5.10. for the AIDS data. For its fit, white veterans with immediate AZT use had estimated probability 0.150 of developing AIDS symptoms during the study. Since 107 white veterans took AZT, the fitted value is 107ЕҪ0.150. s 16.0 for developing symptoms and 107ЕҪ0.850. s 91.0 for not developing them. Similarly, one can obtain fitted values for all eight cells in Table 5.5. The goodness-of-fit statistics comparing these with the cell counts are G2 s 1.38 and X 2 s 1.39. The model has four binomials, one at each combination of AZT use and race. Since it has three parameters, residual df s 4 y 3 s 1. The small G2 and X 2 values suggest that the model fits decently ЕҪ P ) 0.2..
For model ЕҪ5.10., the odds ratio between X and Y is the same at each level of Z. The goodness-of-fit test checks this structure. That is, the test also provides a test of homogeneous odds ratios. For Table 5.5, homogeneity is plausible. Since residual df s 1, the more complex model that adds an interaction term and permits the two odds ratios to differ is saturated.
Let LS denote the maximized log likelihood for the saturated model. As discussed in Section 4.5.4, the likelihood-ratio statistic for comparing models M1 and M0 is

G2 ЕҪ M0 < M1 . s y2ЕҪ L0 y L1 .
s y2ЕҪ L0 y LS . y y2ЕҪ L1 y LS . s G2 ЕҪ M0 . y G2 ЕҪ M1 . .

The test statistic comparing two models is identical to the difference in G2 goodness-of-fit statistics ЕҪdeviances. for the two models. To illustrate, con-
sider H0: вҗӨ2 s 0 for the race effect with the AIDS data. The likelihood-ratio statistic equals 0.04, suggesting that the simpler model is adequate. But this equals G2ЕҪ M0. y G2ЕҪ M1. s 1.42 y 1.38, where M0 is the simpler model with вҗӨ2 s 0.
The model comparison statistic often has an approximate chi-squared null distribution even when separate G2ЕҪ Mi. do not. For instance, when a predictor is continuous or a contingency table has very small fitted values, the sampling distribution of G2ЕҪ Mi. may be far from chi-squared. Nonetheless, if df for the comparison statistic is modest ЕҪas in comparing two models that differ by a few parameters., the null distribution of G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. is approximately chi-squared.

188

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

5.4.4 Horseshoe Crab Example Revisited
Like ordinary regression, logistic regression can have a mixture of quantitative and qualitative predictors. We illustrate with the horseshoe crab data ЕҪSection 5.1.3., using the female crabвҖҷs width and color as predictors. Color has five categories: light, medium light, medium, medium dark, dark. It is a surrogate for age, older crabs tending to be darker. The sample contained no light crabs, so our models use only the other four categories.
We first treat color as qualitative. The four categories use three dummy variables. The model is

logitЕҪвҗІ . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1c1 q вҗӨ2 c2 q вҗӨ3 c3 q вҗӨ4 x ,

ЕҪ 5 .12.

where вҗІ s PЕҪY s 1., x s width in centimeters, and

c1 s 1 for medium-light color, and 0 otherwise,
c2 s 1 for medium color, and 0 otherwise,
c3 s 1 for medium-dark color, and 0 otherwise.
The crab color is dark ЕҪcategory 4. when c1 s c2 s c3 s 0. Table 5.8 shows
the ML parameter estimates. For instance, for dark crabs, logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s y12.715 q 0.468 x; by contrast, for medium-light crabs, c1 s 1, and logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ .
s ЕҪy12.715 q 1.330. q 0.468 x s y11.385 q 0.468 x. At the average width
of 26.3 cm, вҗІЛҶ s 0.399 for dark crabs and 0.715 for medium-light crabs.
The model assumes a lack of interaction between color and width in their effects. Width has the same coefficient ЕҪ0.468. for all colors, so the shapes of the curves relating width to вҗІ are identical. For each color, a 1-cm increase in width has a multiplicative effect of expЕҪ0.468. s 1.60 on the odds that Y s 1. Figure 5.5 displays the fitted model. Any one curve equals any other

TABLE 5.8 Computer Output for Model with Width and Color Predictors

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

168

187.4570

Pearson Chi- Square

168

168.6590

Log Likelihood

y93.7285

Parameter intercept c1 c2 c3 width

Estimate y12.7151
1.3299 1.4023 1.1061 0.4680

Standard Error 2.7618 0.8525 0.5484 0.5921 0.1055

Likelihood- Ratio 95%

Confidence Limits

y18.4564 y7.5788

y0.2738

3.1354

0.3527

2.5260

y0.0279

2.3138

0.2713

0.6870

ChiSquare 21.20
2.43 6.54 3.49 19.66

Pr>ChiSq <.0001 0.1188 0.0106 0.0617 <.0001

MULTIPLE LOGISTIC REGRESSION

189

FIGURE 5.5 Logistic regression model using width and color predictors of satellite presence for horseshoe crabs.
curve shifted to the right or left. The parallelism of curves in the horizontal dimension implies that any two curves never cross. At all width values, color 4 ЕҪdark. has a lower estimated probability of a satellite than the other colors. There is a noticeable positive effect of width.
The exponentiated difference between two color parameter estimates is an odds ratio comparing those colors. For instance, the difference for mediumlight crabs and dark crabs equals 1.330. At any given width, the estimated odds that a medium-light crab has a satellite are exp ЕҪ1.330. s 3.8 times the estimated odds for a dark crab. At width x s 26.3, the odds equal 0.715r0.285 s 2.51 for a medium-light crab and 0.399r0.601 s 0.66 for a dark crab, for which 2.51r0.66 s 3.8.
5.4.5 Model Comparison To test whether color contributes significantly to model ЕҪ5.12., we test H0: вҗӨ1 s вҗӨ2 s вҗӨ3 s 0. This states that controlling for width, the probability of a satellite is independent of color. We compare the maximized log-likelihood L1 for the full model ЕҪ5.12. to L0 for the simpler model. The test statistic y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. s 7.0 has df s 3, the difference between the numbers of parameters in the two models. The chi-squared P-value of 0.07 provides slight evidence of a color effect.
The more complex model allowing color = width interaction has three additional terms, the cross-products of width with the color dummy variables.

190

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

Fitting this model is equivalent to fitting logistic regression with width predictor separately for crabs of each color. Each color then has a differentshaped curve relating width to PЕҪY s 1., so a comparison of two colors varies according to the width value. The likelihood-ratio statistic comparing the models with and without the interaction terms equals 4.4, with df s 3. The evidence of interaction is weak ЕҪ P s 0.22..

5.4.6 Quantitative Treatment of Ordinal Predictor
Color has ordered categories, from lightest to darkest. A simpler model yet treats this predictor as quantitative. Color may have a linear effect, for a set of monotone scores. To illustrate, for scores c s Г„1, 2, 3, 44 for the color categories, the model

logitЕҪвҗІ . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1c q вҗӨ2 x

ЕҪ 5 .13.

has вҗӨЛҶ1 s y0.509 ЕҪSE s 0.224. and вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.458 ЕҪSE s 0.104.. This shows
strong evidence of an effect for each. At a given width, for every one-category increase in color darkness, the estimated odds of a satellite multiply by exp ЕҪy0.509. s 0.60.
The likelihood-ratio statistic comparing this fit to the more complex model ЕҪ5.12. having a separate parameter for each color equals 1.7 ЕҪdf s 2.. This statistic tests that the simpler model ЕҪ5.13. is adequate, given that model ЕҪ5.12. holds. It tests that when plotted against the color scores, the color parameters in ЕҪ5.12. follow a linear trend. The simplification seems permissible ЕҪ P s 0.44..
The color parameter estimates in the qualitative-color model ЕҪ5.12. are ЕҪ1.33, 1.40, 1.11, 0., the 0 value for the dark category reflecting its lack of a dummy variable. Although these values do not depart significantly from a linear trend, the first three are quite similar compared to the last one. Thus, another potential color scoring for model ЕҪ5.13. is Г„1, 1, 1, 04; that is, score s 0 for dark-colored crabs, and score s 1 otherwise. The likelihood-ratio statistic comparing model ЕҪ5.13. with these binary scores to model ЕҪ5.12. equals 0.5 ЕҪdf s 2., showing that this simpler model is also adequate. Its fit is

logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s y12.980 q 1.300 c q 0.478 x,

ЕҪ 5 .14.

with standard errors 0.526 and 0.104. At a given width, the estimated odds that a lighter-colored crab has a satellite are exp ЕҪ1.300. s 3.7 times the estimated odds for a dark crab.
In summary, the qualitative-color model, the quantitative-color model with scores Г„1, 2, 3, 44, and the model with binary color scores Г„1, 1, 1, 04 all suggest that dark crabs are least likely to have satellites. A much larger sample is

MULTIPLE LOGISTIC REGRESSION

191

needed to determine which color scoring is most appropriate. It is advantageous to treat ordinal predictors in a quantitative manner when such models fit well. The model is simpler and easier to interpret, and tests of the predictor effect are more powerful when it has a single parameter rather than several parameters. In Section 6.4 we discuss this issue further.

5.4.7 Standardized and Probability-Based Interpretations
To compare effects of quantitative predictors having different units, it can be helpful to report standardized coefficients. One approach fits the model to standardized predictors, replacing each x j by ЕҪ x j y x j.rsxj. Then, each regression coefficient represents the effect of a standard deviation change in a predictor, controlling for the other variables. Equivalently, for each j one
can multiply unstandardized estimate вҗӨЛҶj by sxj ЕҪsee also Note 5.9..
Regardless of the units, many find it difficult to understand odds or odds ratio effects. The simpler interpretation of the approximate change in the probability based on a linearization of the model ЕҪSection 5.1.1. applies also to multiple predictors. Consider a setting of predictors at which
PЛҶЕҪY s 1. s вҗІЛҶ . Then, controlling for the other predictors, a 1-unit increase in x j corresponds approximately to a вҗӨЛҶjвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ . change in вҗІЛҶ . For instance, at predictor settings at which вҗІЛҶ s 0.5 for fit ЕҪ5.14., the approximate effect of
a 1-cm increase in width is ЕҪ0.478.ЕҪ0.5.ЕҪ0.5. s 0.12. This is considerable, since a 1-cm change in width is less than half a standard deviation.
This linear approximation deteriorates as the change in the predictor increases. More precise interpretations use the probability formula directly. To describe the effect of x j, one could set the other predictors at their sample means and compute the estimated probabilities at the smallest and largest x j values. These are sensitive to outliers, however. It is often more sensible to use the quartiles.
For fit ЕҪ5.14., the sample means are 26.3 for x and 0.873 for c. The lower
and upper quartiles of x are 24.9 and 27.7. At x s 24.9 and c s c, вҗІЛҶ s 0.51. At x s 27.7 and c s c, вҗІЛҶ s 0.80. The change in вҗІЛҶ from 0.51 to 0.80 over the
middle 50% of the range of width values reflects a strong width effect. Since c takes only values 0 and 1, one could instead report this effect separately for each. Also, when an explanatory variable is a dummy, it makes sense to report the estimated probabilities at its two values rather than at quartiles,
which could be identical. At x s 26.3, вҗІЛҶ s 0.40 when c s 0 and вҗІЛҶ s 0.71
when c s 1. This color effect, differentiating dark crabs from others, is also substantial.
Table 5.9 shows a way to present effects that can be understandable to those not familiar with odds ratios. It also shows results of the extension of model ЕҪ5.14., permitting interaction. The estimated width effect is then greater for the lighter-colored crabs. However, the interaction is not significant.

192

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

TABLE 5.9 Summary of Effects in Model (5.14) with Crab Width and Color as Predictors of Presence of Satellites

Variable

Estimate SE

Comparison Change in Probability

No interaction model Intercept Color ЕҪ0 s dark, 1 s other. Width, x ЕҪcm.
Interaction model Intercept Color ЕҪ0 s dark, 1 s other. Width, x ЕҪcm. Width = color

y12.980
1.300 0.478
y5.854
y6.958 0.200 0.322

2.727
0.526 0.104
6.694
7.318 0.262 0.286

ЕҪ1, 0. at x ЕҪUQ, LQ. at c ЕҪUQ, LQ. at c s 0 ЕҪUQ, LQ. at c s 1

0.31 s 0.71 y 0.40 0.29 s 0.80 y 0.51
0.13 s 0.43 y 0.30 0.29 s 0.84 y 0.55

5.5 FITTING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

The mechanics of ML estimation and model fitting for logistic regression are

special cases of the GLM fitting results of Section 4.6. With n subjects, we treat the n binary responses as independent. Let x i s ЕҪ xi1, . . . , xi p. denote setting i of values of p explanatory variables, i s 1, . . . , N. When explana-

tory variables are continuous, a different setting may occur for each subject, in which case N s n. The logistic regression model ЕҪ5.8., regarding вҗЈ as a

regression parameter with unit coefficient, is

вҗІ ЕҪx i . s p expЕҪГқj . ps1 вҗӨj xi j . 1 q expЕҪГқjs1 вҗӨj xi j .

ЕҪ 5 .15.

5.5.1 Likelihood Equations

When more than one observation occurs at a fixed xi value, it is sufficient to
record the number of observations ni and the number of successes. We then
let yi refer to this success count rather than to an individual binary response. Then Г„Y1, . . . , YN 4 are independent binomials with EЕҪYi. s niвҗІ ЕҪx i., where n1 q РёРёРё qnN s n. Their joint probability mass function is proportional to the
product of N binomial functions,

N
ЕҒ вҗІ ЕҪ x i . yi 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x i . niyy i
is1

N вҗІ ЕҪxi. yi

ВҪ Еҫ / 5 ВҪ 5 s ЕҒexp log

is1

1 y вҗІ ЕҪxi.

N
ЕҒ 1 y вҗІ ЕҪxi. ni
is1

ВҪ 5 ВҪ 5 s exp Гқ yi log вҗІ ЕҪxi.

i

1 y вҗІ ЕҪxi.

N
ЕҒ 1 y вҗІ ЕҪxi. ni .
is1

FITTING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

193

For model ЕҪ5.15., the ith logit is Гқj вҗӨj xi j, so the exponential term in the last expression equals exp wГқi yiЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j.x s exp wГқjЕҪГқi yi xi j.вҗӨj x. Also, since w1 y вҗІ ЕҪx i.x s w1 q exp ЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j.xy1, the log likelihood equals

Еҫ / Еҫ / LЕҪ вҗӨ. s Гқ Гқ yi xi j вҗӨj y Гқ ni log 1 q exp Гқ вҗӨj xi j .

ji

i

j

ЕҪ 5 .16.

This depends on the binomial counts only through the sufficient statistics Г„Гқi yi xi j, j s 1, . . . , p4.
The likelihood equations result from setting СЁ LЕҪвҗӨ.rСЁ вҗӨ s 0. Since

s СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ . Гқ yi xi j y Гқ ni xi j expЕҪГқk вҗӨk xik . ,

СЁвҗӨj

i

i

1 q expЕҪГқk вҗӨk xik .

the likelihood equations are

Гқ yi xi j y Гқ niвҗІЛҶi xi j s 0,

i

i

j s 1, . . . , p,

ЕҪ 5 .17.

where вҗІЛҶi s exp ЕҪГқk вҗӨЛҶk xik .rw1 q exp ЕҪГқk вҗӨЛҶk xik .x is the ML estimate of вҗІ ЕҪx i..
We observed these equations as a special case of those for binomial GLMs in ЕҪ4.25. ЕҪbut there yi is the proportion of successes.. The equations are nonlinear and require iterative solution.
Let X denote the N = p matrix of values of Г„ xi j4. The likelihood equations ЕҪ5.17. have form

XX y s XXвҗ®ЛҶ ,

ЕҪ 5 .18.

where вҗ®ЛҶi s niвҗІЛҶi. This equation illustrates a fundamental result: For GLMs
with canonical link, the likelihood equations equate the sufficient statistics to the estimates of their expected values. Equation ЕҪ4.44. showed this result in the GLM context, and ЕҪ5.18. are the normal equations in ordinary regression.

5.5.2 Asymptotic Covariance Matrix of Parameter Estimators
The ML estimators вҗӨЛҶ have a large-sample normal distribution with covari-
ance matrix equal to the inverse of the information matrix. The observed information matrix has elements

y s СЁ 2LЕҪ вҗӨ . Гқ 2 s xia xib ni expЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j . Гқ xia xib niвҗІ i ЕҪ1 y вҗІ i . .

СЁвҗӨaСЁвҗӨb

i 1 q expЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j .

i

ЕҪ 5 .19.

This is not a function of Г„ yi4, so the observed and expected information are identical. This happens for all GLMs that use canonical links ЕҪSection 4.6.4..

194

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

The estimated covariance matrix is the inverse of the matrix having
elements ЕҪ5.19., substituting вҗӨЛҶ. This has form

$ ЛҶ X y1
covЕҪвҗӨ . s Г„X diag niвҗІЛҶi ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi . X4 ,

ЕҪ 5 .20.

where diag w niвҗІЛҶiЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.x denotes the N = N diagonal matrix having Г„niвҗІЛҶiЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.4 on the main diagonal. This is the special case of the GLM covariance matrix ЕҪ4.28. with estimated diagonal weight matrix WЛҶ having elements wЛҶi s niвҗІЛҶiЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.. The square roots of the main diagonal elements of ЕҪ5.20. are estimated standard errors of вҗӨЛҶ.

5.5.3 Distribution of Probability Estimators

$
Using covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ ., one can conduct inference about вҗӨ and related effects such as

' odds ratios. One can also construct confidence intervals for response proba-

bilities вҗІ ЕҪx. at particular settings x.

$

The estimated variance of logitwвҗІЛҶ ЕҪx.x s xвҗӨЛҶ is x covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ .xX. For large sam-

ples, logitwвҗІЛҶ ЕҪx.x " zвҗЈr2 x cov $ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ .xX is a confidence interval for the true logit.

The endpoints invert to a corresponding interval for вҗІ ЕҪx. using the transform

вҗІ s exp ЕҪlogit.rw1 q expЕҪlogit.x.

5.5.4 NewtonвҖ“Raphson Method Applied to Logistic Regression

We refer back to Section 4.6.1 for the NewtonбҺҗRaphson iterative method. Let

uЕҪt. s СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ.
j

s Гқ ЕҪ yi y niвҗІ ЕҪt. i . xi j

СЁвҗӨj вҗӨЕҪt.

i

СЁ 2LЕҪвҗӨ.
hЕҪt. s
ab

s

y

Гқ

x

i

a

x

i

b

n

iвҗІ

ЕҪ i

t

.

ЕҪ

1

y

вҗІ

ЕҪ i

t

.

.

.

СЁвҗӨa СЁвҗӨb вҗӨЕҪt.

i

Here, вҗІЕҪt., approximation t for вҗІЛҶ , is obtained from вҗӨЕҪt. through

вҗІ ЕҪt. exp s ЕҪГқ jps1 вҗӨjЕҪt. xi j . .

i

1 q expЕҪГқjps1 вҗӨjЕҪt. xi j .

ЕҪ 5 .21.

We use uЕҪt. and HЕҪt. with formula ЕҪ4.39. to obtain the next value вҗӨЕҪtq1. , which in this context is

вҗӨЕҪtq1. s вҗӨЕҪt. q Г„XXdiag

n

iвҗІ

ЕҪ i

t

.

ЕҪ

1

y

вҗІ

ЕҪ i

t

.

.

X4y1XX ЕҪy y вҗ®ЕҪt. . ,

ЕҪ 5 .22.

where вҗ®iЕҪt. s niвҗІ iЕҪt.. This is used to obtain вҗІЕҪtq1. , and so forth.

FITTING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

195

With an initial guess вҗӨЕҪ0., ЕҪ5.21. yields вҗІЕҪ0., and for t ) 0 the iterations

proceed as just described using ЕҪ5.22. and ЕҪ5.21.. In the limit, вҗІЕҪt. and вҗӨЕҪt.

converge to the ML estimates вҗІЛҶ and вҗӨЛҶ ЕҪWalker and Duncan 1967.. The HЕҪt.

matrices converge to HЛҶ s yXXdiag w niвҗІЛҶiЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.xX. By ЕҪ5.20. the estimated

asymptotic covariance matrix of вҗӨЛҶ is a by-product of the NewtonбҺҗRaphson

method, namely yHЛҶy1.

From the argument in Section 4.6.3, вҗӨЕҪtq1. has the iterative reweighted

least

squares

form

ЕҪXX Vy1 X.y1 XX Vy1 zЕҪt.,

t

t

where

zЕҪt.

has

elements

ЕҪ t. вҗІ iЕҪ t.

yi y niвҗІ iЕҪt.

zi s log

ЕҪt. q

ЕҪt.

ЕҪt. ,

1 y вҗІi

niвҗІi ЕҪ1 y вҗІi .

ЕҪ 5 .23.

and

where

Vt

is

a

diagonal

matrix

with

elements

Г„1rn

iвҗІ

ЕҪ i

t

.ЕҪ1

y

вҗІ

ЕҪ i

t

.

.4.

In

this

expression, zЕҪt. is the linearized form of the logit link function for the sample

data, evaluated at вҗІЕҪt. wsee ЕҪ4.42.x. From Section 3.1.6 the elements of Vt are

estimated asymptotic variances of the sample logits. The ML estimate is the

limit of a sequence of weighted least squares estimates, where the weight

matrix changes at each cycle.

5.5.5 Convergence and Existence of Finite Estimates
The log-likelihood function for logistic regression models is strictly concave. ML estimates exist and are unique except in certain boundary cases ЕҪHaberman 1974a; Wedderburn 1976; Albert and Anderson 1984.. Estimates do not exist or may be infinite when there is no overlap in the sets of explanatory variable values having y s 0 and having y s 1; that is, when a hyperplane can pass through the space of predictor values such that on one side of that hyperplane y s 0 for all observations, whereas on the other side, y s 1 always. There is then perfect discrimination, as one can predict the sample outcomes perfectly by knowing the predictor values ЕҪexcept possibly at a boundary point.. When there is overlap, ML estimates exist and are unique. Similar results occur for the probit and some other links ЕҪSilvapulle 1981..
Figure 5.6 illustrates for a single explanatory variable. Here, y s 0 at
x s 10, 20, 30, 40, and y s 1 at x s 60, 70, 80, 90. An ideal fit has вҗІЛҶ s 0 for x F 40 and вҗІЛҶ s 1 for x G 60. By letting вҗӨЛҶв„ў Пұ and, for fixed вҗӨЛҶ, letting вҗЈЛҶ s yвҗӨЛҶЕҪ50. so that вҗІЛҶ s 0.5 at x s 50, one generates a sequence with
ever-increasing value of the likelihood that comes successively closer to a perfect fit.
In practice, most software fails to recognize that вҗӨЛҶs Пұ. After a few cycles
of iterative fitting, the log likelihood looks flat at the working estimate, and convergence criteria are satisfied. Because the log likelihood is so flat and because variances come from the inverse of the matrix of negative second derivatives, software typically reports huge standard errors. For these data,
for instance, PROC GENMOD in SAS reports logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s y192.2 q 3.8 x
with standard errors of 8.0 = 108 and 1.5 = 107.

196

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

FIGURE 5.6 Perfect discrimination resulting in infinite logistic regression parameter estimate.

NOTES
Section 5.1: Interpreting Parameters in Logistic Regression

5.1. Books focusing on applied logistic regression include Collett ЕҪ1991. and Hosmer and Lemeshow ЕҪ2000.. Books having major components on logistic regression include Christensen ЕҪ1997., Cox and Snell ЕҪ1989., and Morgan ЕҪ1992.. Prentice ЕҪ1976b. and Stukel ЕҪ1988. extended the scope by introducing shape parameters that modify the behavior of

the curve in extreme probability regions and allow for asymmetric treatment of the two

tails.

5.2. Haldane

ЕҪ1956.

recommended

adding

1 2

to

the

numerator

and

denominator

of

the

sample logit. With this modification, the bias is on the order of only 1rn2i , for large ni

ЕҪsee Firth 1993a and Problem 14.4..

5.3. The Cornfield ЕҪ1962. result about normal distributions for ЕҪ X < Y s i. implying the logistic curve for PЕҪY s 1 < x. suggests that logistic regression is useful in discrimination

and classification problems. These use a subjectвҖҷs x value to predict to which of two populations they belong. Anderson ЕҪ1975., Bull and Donner ЕҪ1987., Efron ЕҪ1975., and Press and Wilson ЕҪ1978. compared logistic regression favorably to discriminant analysis,

which assumes that explanatory variables have a normal distribution at each level of Y.

5.4. Rosenbaum and Rubin ЕҪ1983. used logistic regression to adjust for bias in comparing

two groups in observational studies. They defined the propensity as the probability of

being in one group, for a given setting of the explanatory variables x, and they used

logistic regression to estimate how propensity depends on x. In comparing the groups on

the response variable, they showed that one can control for differing distributions of the

groups on x by adjusting for the estimated propensity. This is done by using the

propensity to match samples from the groups or to subclassify subjects into several strata

consisting of intervals of propensity scores or to adjust directly by entering the propensity in the model. See DвҖҷAgostino ЕҪ1998. for a tutorial.

5.5. Adelbasit and Plackett ЕҪ1983., Chaloner and Larntz ЕҪ1988., Minkin ЕҪ1987., and Wu ЕҪ1985. discussed design problems for binary response experiments, such as choosing

settings for a predictor to optimize a criterion for estimating parameter values or

estimating the setting at which the response probability equals some fixed value. The

nonconstant variance makes this challenging.

PROBLEMS

197

Section 5.2: Inference for Logistic Regression
5.6. Albert and Anderson ЕҪ1984., Berkson ЕҪ1951, 1953, 1955., Cox ЕҪ1958a., Hodges ЕҪ1958., and Walker and Duncan ЕҪ1967. discussed ML estimation for logistic regression. For adjustments with complex sample surveys, see Hosmer and Lemeshow ЕҪ2000, Sec. 6.4. and LaVange et al. ЕҪ2001.. Scott and Wild ЕҪ2001. discussed the analyses of caseбҺҗ control studies with complex sampling designs.
5.7. Tsiatis ЕҪ1980. suggested an alternative goodness-of-fit test that partitions values for the explanatory variables into a set of regions and adds a dummy variable to the model for each region. The test statistic compares the fit of this model to the simpler one, testing that the extra parameters are not needed. The idea of grouping values to check model fit by comparing observed and fitted counts extends to any GLM ЕҪPregibon 1982.. Hosmer et al. ЕҪ1997. compared various ways of doing this.

Section 5.3: Logit Models with Categorical Predictors
5.8. The CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test is locally asymptotically efficient for both linear and logistic alternatives for PЕҪY s 1.. Its efficiency against linear alternatives follows from the approximate normality of the sample proportions, with constant Bernoulli variance when вҗӨ s 0. For the linear logit model ЕҪ5.5., its efficiency follows from its equivalence with the score test. See Problem 9.35 and Cox ЕҪ1958a. for related remarks. Tarone and Gart ЕҪ1980. showed that the score test for a binary linear trend model does not depend on the link function. Gross ЕҪ1981. noted that for the linear logit model, the local asymptotic relative efficiency for testing independence using the statistic with an incorrect set of scores equals the square of the Pearson correlation between the true and incorrect scores. Simon ЕҪ1978. gave related asymptotic results. Corcoran et al. ЕҪ2001., Mantel ЕҪ1963., and Podgor et al. ЕҪ1996. extended the trend test.

Section 5.4: Multiple Logistic Regression
5.9. Since the standardized logistic cdf has standard deviation вҗІr'3 , some software ЕҪe.g.,
PROC LOGISTIC in SAS. defines a standardized estimate by multiplying the unstan-
dardized estimate by sxj'3rвҗІ .

PROBLEMS
Applications
5.1 For a study using logistic regression to determine characteristics associated with remission in cancer patients, Table 5.10 shows the most important explanatory variable, a labeling index ЕҪLI.. This index measures proliferative activity of cells after a patient receives an injection of tritiated thymidine, representing the percentage of cells that are вҖҳвҖҳlabeled.вҖҷвҖҷ The response Y measured whether the patient achieved remission ЕҪ1 s yes.. Software reports Table 5.11 for a logistic regression model using LI to predict the probability of remission.

198

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

TABLE 5.10 Data for Problem 5.1

Number Number of

Number Number of

Number Number of

LI of Cases Remissions LI of Cases Remissions LI of Cases Remissions

8

2

0

18

1

1

28

1

1

10

2

0

20

3

2

32

1

0

12

3

0

22

2

1

34

1

1

14

3

0

24

1

0

38

3

2

16

3

0

26

1

1

Source: Data reprinted with permission from E. T. Lee, Comput. Prog. Biomed. 4: 80бҺҗ92 ЕҪ1974..

TABLE 5.11 Computer Output for Problem 5.1

Criterion y2 Log L

Intercept Only
34.372

Intercept and Covariates 26.073

Testing Global Null Hypothesis: BETA = 0

Test

Chi- Square

DF

Pr > ChiSq

Likelihood Ratio

8.2988

1

0.0040

Score

7.9311

1

0.0049

Wald

5.9594

1

0.0146

Parameter Intercept li

Estimate y3.7771
0.1449

Standard Error 1.3786 0.0593

Chi- Square 7.5064 5.9594

Pr > ChiSq 0.0061 0.0146

Effect li

Odds Ratio Estimates

Point Estimate

95% Wald Confidence Limits

1.156

1.029 1.298

Estimated Covariance Matrix

Variable

Intercept

li

Intercept

1.900616

y0.07653

li

y0.07653

0.003521

Obs li

remiss

n

piбҺҗhat

lower

upper

1

8

0

2

0.06797

0.01121

0.31925

2

10

0

2

0.08879

0.01809

0.34010

a. Show how software obtained вҗІЛҶ s 0.068 when LI s 8. b. Show that вҗІЛҶ s 0.5 when LI s 26.0. c. Show that the rate of change in вҗІЛҶ is 0.009 when LI s 8 and 0.036
when LI s 26.
d. The lower quartile and upper quartile for LI are 14 and 28. Show
that вҗІЛҶ increases by 0.42, from 0.15 to 0.57, between those values.
e. For a unit change in LI, show that the estimated odds of remission multiply by 1.16.

PROBLEMS

199

f. Explain how to obtain the confidence interval reported for the odds ratio. Interpret.
g. Construct a Wald test for the effect. Interpret.
h. Conduct a likelihood-ratio test for the effect, showing how to construct the test statistic using the y2 log L values reported.
i. Show how software obtained the confidence interval for вҗІ reported at LI s 8. ЕҪ Hint: Use the reported covariance matrix..

TABLE 5.12 Data for Problem 5.2a
Ft Temp TD Ft Temp TD Ft Temp TD Ft Temp TD Ft Temp TD
1 66 0 2 70 1 3 69 0 4 68 0 5 67 0 6 72 0 7 73 0 8 70 0 9 57 1 10 63 1 11 70 1 12 78 0 13 67 0 14 53 1 15 67 0 16 75 0 17 70 0 18 81 0 19 76 0 20 79 0 21 75 1 22 76 0 23 58 1 aFt, flight number; Temp, temperature ЕҪРҠF.; TD, thermal distress ЕҪ1, yes; 0, no.. Source: Data based on Table 1 in J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., 84: 945бҺҗ957, ЕҪ1989., by S. R. Dalal, E. B. Fowlkes, and B. Hoadley. Reprinted with permission from the Journal of the American Statistical Association.

5.2 For the 23 space shuttle flights before the Challenger mission disaster in 1986, Table 5.12 shows the temperature at the time of the flight and whether at least one primary O-ring suffered thermal distress.
a. Use logistic regression to model the effect of temperature on the probability of thermal distress. Plot a figure of the fitted model, and interpret.
b. Estimate the probability of thermal distress at 31РҠF, the temperature at the place and time of the Challenger flight.
c. Construct a confidence interval for the effect of temperature on the odds of thermal distress, and test the statistical significance of the effect.
d. Check the model fit by comparing it to a more complex model.
5.3 Refer to Table 4.2. Using scores Г„0, 2, 4, 54 for snoring, fit the logistic regression model. Interpret using fitted probabilities, linear approximations, and effects on the odds. Analyze the goodness of fit.
5.4 Hastie and Tibshirani ЕҪ1990, p. 282. described a study to determine risk factors for kyphosis, severe forward flexion of the spine following corrective spinal surgery. The age in months at the time of the operation for the 18 subjects for whom kyphosis was present were 12, 15, 42, 52, 59, 73, 82, 91, 96, 105, 114, 120, 121, 128, 130, 139, 139, 157

200

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

and for 22 of the subjects for whom kyphosis was absent were 1, 1, 2, 8, 11, 18, 22, 31, 37, 61, 72, 81, 97, 112, 118, 127, 131, 140, 151, 159, 177, 206.
a. Fit a logistic regression model using age as a predictor of whether kyphosis is present. Test whether age has a significant effect.
b. Plot the data. Note the difference in dispersion on age at the two levels of kyphosis. Fit the model logitwвҗІ ЕҪ x.x s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 x q вҗӨ2 x 2. Test the significance of the squared age term, plot the fit, and interpret. ЕҪNote also Problem 5.33..
5.5 Refer to Table 6.11. The Pearson test of independence has X 2ЕҪ I . s 6.88 ЕҪ P s 0.14.. For equally spaced scores, the CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test has z 2 s 6.67 ЕҪ P s 0.01.. Interpret, and explain why results differ so. Analyze the data using a linear logit model. Test independence using the Wald and likelihood-ratio tests, and compare results to the CochranбҺҗArmitage test. Check the fit of the model, and interpret.

5.6 For Table 5.3, conduct the trend test using alcohol consumption scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4, 5. instead of ЕҪ0.0, 0.5, 1.5, 4.0, 7.0.. Compare results, noting the sensitivity to the choice of scores for highly unbalanced data.
5.7 Refer to Table 2.11. Using scores ЕҪ0, 3, 9.5, 19.5, 37, 55. for cigarette smoking, analyze these data using a logit model. Is the intercept estimate meaningful? Explain.

5.8 A study used the 1998 Behavioral Risk Factors Social Survey to consider factors associated with womenвҖҷs use of oral contraceptives in the United States. Table 5.13 summarizes effects for a logistic regression model for the probability of using oral contraceptives. Each predictor uses a dummy variable, and the table lists the category having dummy outcome 1. Interpret effects. Construct and interpret a confidence interval for the conditional odds ratio between contraceptive use and education.

TABLE 5.13 Data for Problem 5.8

Variable

Coding s 1 if:

Estimate

SE

Age Race Education Marital status

35 or younger White G 1 year college Married

y1.320 0.622 0.501
y0.460

0.087 0.098 0.077 0.073

Source: Data courtesy of Debbie Wilson, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida.

PROBLEMS

TABLE 5.14 Computer Output for Problem 5.9

Parameter Intercept def vic

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

1

0.3798

Pearson Chi- Square

1

0.1978

Log Likelihood

y209.4783

Standard

Likelihood Ratio

Estimate

Error

95% Conf Limits

y3.5961

0.5069

y4.7754 y2.7349

y0.8678

0.3671

y1.5633 y0.1140

2.4044

0.6006

1.3068

3.7175

Source def vic

LR Statistics

DF

Chi- Square

Pr > ChiSq

1

5.01

0.0251

1

20.35

<.0001

201
ChiSquare 50.33
5.59 16.03

5.9 Refer to Table 2.6. Table 5.14 shows the results of fitting a logit model, treating death penalty as the response ЕҪ1 s yes. and defendantвҖҷs race ЕҪ1 s white. and victimsвҖҷ race ЕҪ1 s white. as dummy predictors. a. Interpret parameter estimates. Which group is most likely to have the yes response? Find the estimated probability in that case. b. Interpret 95% confidence intervals for conditional odds ratios. c. Test the effect of defendantвҖҷs race, controlling for victimsвҖҷ race, using a ЕҪi. Wald test, and ЕҪii. likelihood-ratio test. Interpret. d. Test the goodness of fit. Interpret.
5.10 Model the effects of victimвҖҷs race and defendantвҖҷs race for Table 2.13. Interpret.
5.11 Table 5.15 appeared in a national study of 15- and 16-year-old adolescent. The event of interest is ever having sexual intercourse. Analyze,

TABLE 5.15 Data for Problem 5.11

Race

Gender

Intercourse

Yes

No

White

Male

43

134

Female

26

149

Black

Male

29

23

Female

22

36

Source: S. P. Morgan and J. D. Teachman, J. Marriage Fam. 50: 929бҺҗ936 ЕҪ1988.. Reprinted with permission from the National Council on Family Relations.

202

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

including description and inference about the effects of gender and race, goodness of fit, and summary interpretations.
5.12 According to the Independent newspaper ЕҪLondon, Mar. 8, 1994., the Metropolitan Police in London reported 30,475 people as missing in the year ending March 1993. For those of age 13 or less, 33 of 3271 missing males and 38 of 2486 missing females were still missing a year later. For ages 14 to 18, the values were 63 of 7256 males and 108 of 8877 females; for ages 19 and above, the values were 157 of 5065 males and 159 of 3520 females. Analyze and interpret. ЕҪThanks to Pat Altham for showing me these data..

5.13 The National Collegiate Athletic Association studied graduation rates for freshman student athletes during the 1984бҺҗ1985 academic year. The ЕҪsample size, number graduated. totals were ЕҪ796, 498. for white females, ЕҪ1625, 878. for white males, ЕҪ143, 54. for black females, and ЕҪ60, 197. for black males ЕҪJ. J. McArdle and F. Hamagami, J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 89: 1107бҺҗ1123, 1994.. Analyze and interpret.

5.14 In a study designed to evaluate whether an educational program makes sexually active adolescents more likely to obtain condoms, adolescents were randomly assigned to two experimental groups. The educational program, involving a lecture and videotape about transmission of the HIV virus, was provided to one group but not the other. Table 5.16 summarizes results of a logistic regression model for factors observed to influence teenagers to obtain condoms. a. Find the parameter estimates for the fitted model, using ЕҪ1, 0. dummy variables for the first three predictors. Based on the corresponding confidence interval for the log odds ratio, determine the standard error for the group effect.
b. Explain why either the estimate of 1.38 for the odds ratio for gender or the corresponding confidence interval is incorrect. Show that if the reported interval is correct, 1.38 is actually the log odds ratio, and the estimated odds ratio equals 3.98.

TABLE 5.16 Data for Problem 5.14

Variable

Odds Ratio

95% Confidence Interval

Group ЕҪeducation vs. none.

4.04

ЕҪ1.17, 13.9.

Gender ЕҪmales vs. females.

1.38

ЕҪ1.23. 12.88.

SES ЕҪhigh vs. low.

5.82

ЕҪ1.87, 18.28.

Lifetime number of partners

3.22

ЕҪ1.08, 11.31.

Source: V. I. Rickert et al., Clin. Pediatr. 31: 205бҺҗ210 ЕҪ1992..

PROBLEMS

203

TABLE 5.17 Data for Problem 5.15

Variable

Effect

Intercept Alcohol use Smoking Race Race = smoking

y7.00 0.10 1.20 0.30 0.20

P-value
- 0.01 0.03
- 0.01 0.02 0.04

5.15 Table 5.17 shows estimated effects for a logistic regression model with squamous cell esophageal cancer ЕҪY s 1, yes; Y s 0, no. as the response. Smoking status ЕҪS. equals 1 for at least one pack per day and 0 otherwise, alcohol consumption ЕҪ A. equals the average number of alcoholic drinks consumed per day, and race ЕҪ R. equals 1 for blacks and 0 for whites. To describe the race = smoking interaction, construct the prediction equation when R s 1 and again when R s 0. Find the fitted YS conditional odds ratio for each case. Similarly, construct the prediction equation when S s 1 and again when S s 0. Find the fitted YR conditional odds ratios. Note that for each association, the coefficient of the cross-product term is the difference between the log odds ratios at the two fixed levels for the other variable. Explain why the coefficient of S represents the log odds ratio between Y and S for whites. To what hypotheses do the P-values for R and S refer?
5.16 A survey of high school students on Y s whether the subject has driven a motor vehicle after consuming a substantial amount of alcohol ЕҪ1 s yes., s s gender ЕҪ1 s female., r s race ЕҪ1 s black; 0 s white., and g s grade ЕҪ g1 s 1, grade 9; g2 s 1, grade 10; g3 s 1, grade 11; g1 s g2 s g3 s 0, grade 12. has prediction equation
logit PЛҶЕҪ Y s 1. s y0.88 y 0.40 s y 0.72 r y 2.22 g1 y 1.43 g2 y 0.58 g3
q 0.74 rg1 q 0.38 rg2 q 0.01rg3 .
a. Carefully interpret effects. Explain the interaction by describing the race effect at each grade and the grade effect for each race.
b. Replace r above by r1 ЕҪ1 s black, 0 s other.. The study also measured r2 ЕҪ1 s Hispanic, 0 s other., with r1 s r2 s 0 for white. Suppose that the prediction equation is as above but with additional terms y0.29 r2 q 0.53 r2 g1 q 0.25 r2 g2 y 0.06 r2 g3. Interpret the effects.

204

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

TABLE 5.18 Data for Problem 5.17

Patient D T Y Patient D T Y Patient D T Y

1 45 0 0

13

50 1 0

25

20 1 0

2 15 0 0

14

75 1 1

26

45 0 1

3 40 0 1

15

30 0 0

27

15 1 0

4 83 1 1

16

25 0 1

28

25 0 1

5 90 1 1

17

20 1 0

29

15 1 0

6 25 1 1

18

60 1 1

30

30 0 1

7 35 0 1

19

70 1 1

31

40 0 1

8 65 0 1

20

30 0 1

32

15 1 0

9 95 0 1

21

60 0 1

33

135 1 1

10 35 0 1

22

61 0 0

34

20 1 0

11 75 0 1

23

65 0 1

35

40 1 0

12 45 1 1

24

15 1 0

Source: Data from D. Collett, in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics ЕҪNew York: Wiley: 1998., pp. 350бҺҗ358.

5.17 Table 5.18 shows the results of a study about Y s whether a patient having surgery with general anesthesia experienced a sore throat on waking ЕҪ0 s no, 1 s yes. as a function of the D s duration of the surgery ЕҪin minutes. and the T s type of device used to secure the airway ЕҪ0 s laryngeal mask airway, 1 s tracheal tube.. Fit a logit model using these predictors, interpret parameter estimates, and conduct inference about the effects.
5.18 Refer to model ЕҪ5.2. for the horseshoe crabs using x s width. a. Show that ЕҪi. at the mean width ЕҪ26.3., the estimated odds of a satellite equal 2.07; ЕҪii. at x s 27.3, the estimated odds equal 3.40;
and ЕҪiii. since expЕҪ вҗӨЛҶ. s 1.64, 3.40 s ЕҪ1.64.2.07, and the odds in-
crease by 64%. b. Based on the 95% confidence interval for вҗӨ, show that for x near
where вҗІ s 0.5, the rate of increase in the probability of a satellite per 1-cm increase in x falls between about 0.07 and 0.17.
5.19 For Table 4.3, fit a logistic regression model for the probability of a satellite, using color alone as the predictor. a. Treat color as nominal. Explain why this model is saturated. Express its parameter estimates in terms of the sample logits for each color. b. Conduct a likelihood-ratio test that color has no effect. c. Fit a model that treats color as quantitative. Interpret the fit, and test that color has no effect. d. Test the goodness of fit of the model in part ЕҪc.. Interpret.

PROBLEMS

205

5.20 Refer to model ЕҪ5.14.. Describe the effect of width by finding the estimated probabilities of a satellite at its lower and upper quartiles, separately for c s 1 and c s 0.

5.21 Refer to the prediction equation logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s y10.071 y 0.509c q
0.458 x for model ЕҪ5.13.. The means and standard deviations are c s 2.44 and s s 0.80 for color, and x s 26.30 and s s 2.11 for width. For standardized predictors we.g., x s ЕҪwidth y 26.3.r2.11x, explain why the estimated coefficients of c and x equal y0.41 and 0.97. Interpret these by comparing the partial effects of a 1 standard deviation increase in each predictor on the odds. Describe the color
effect by estimating the change in вҗІЛҶ between the first and last color
categories at the mean score for width.

5.22 Refer to model ЕҪ5.12..
a. Fit the model using x s weight. Interpret effects of weight and color.
b. Does the model permitting interaction provide an improved fit? Interpret.
c. For part ЕҪb., construct a confidence interval for a difference between the slope parameters for medium-light and dark crabs. Interpret.
d. Using models that treat color as quantitative, repeat the analyses in parts ЕҪa. to ЕҪc..

5.23 Fowlkes et al. ЕҪ1988. reported results of a survey of employees of a large national corporation to determine how satisfaction depends on race, gender, age, and regional location. The data are at the bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur; aarcdarcda.html.. Fit a logit model to these data and carefully interpret the parameter estimates. Fowlkes et al. ЕҪ1988. reported вҖҳвҖҳThe least-satisfied employees are less than 35 years of age, female, other ЕҪrace., and work in the Northeast; . . . . The most satisfied group is greater than 44 years of age, male, other, and working in the Pacific or Mid-Atlantic regions; the odds of such employees being satisfied are about 3.5 to 1.вҖҷвҖҷ Show how these interpretations result from the fit of this model.

5.24 Let Y denote a subjectвҖҷs opinion about current laws legalizing abortion ЕҪ1 s support., for gender h ЕҪ h s 1, female; h s 2, male., religious affiliation i ЕҪi s 1, Protestant; i s 2, Catholic; i s 3, Jewish., and political party affiliation j ЕҪ j s 1, Democrat; j s 2, Republican; j s 3, Independent.. For survey data, software for fitting the model
logit P ЕҪ Y s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨhG q вҗӨiR q вҗӨjP

206

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

reports

вҗЈЛҶ s 0.62,

вҗӨЛҶG
1

s

0.08,

вҗӨЛҶG
2

s

y0.08,

вҗӨЛҶR
1

s

y0.16,

вҗӨЛҶR
2

s

y0.25,

вҗӨЛҶR
3

s 0.41,

вҗӨЛҶP
1

s

0.87,

вҗӨЛҶP
2

s

y1.27,

вҗӨЛҶP
3

s

0.40.

a. Interpret how the odds of support depends on religion. b. Estimate the probability of support for the group most ЕҪleast. likely

to support current laws.

c. If, instead, parameters used constraints вҗӨ1G s вҗӨ1R s вҗӨ1P s 0, report the estimates.

5.25 Table 5.19 refers to a sample of subjects randomly selected for an Italian study on the relation between income and whether one possesses a travel credit card. At each level of annual income in millions of lira, the table indicates the number of subjects sampled and the number possessing at least one travel credit card. Analyze these data.

TABLE 5.19 Data for Problem 5.25

Income Number

Income Number

Income Number

ЕҪmillions of Credit ЕҪmillions of Credit ЕҪmillions of Credit

of lira. Cases Cards of lira. Cases Cards of lira. Cases Cards

24

1

0

39

2

0

65

6

6

27

1

0

40

5

0

68

3

3

28

5

2

41

2

0

70

5

3

29

3

0

42

2

0

79

1

0

30

9

1

45

1

1

80

1

0

31

5

1

48

1

0

84

1

0

32

8

0

49

1

0

94

1

0

33

1

0

50

10

2

120

6

6

34

7

1

52

1

0

130

1

1

35

1

1

59

1

0

38

3

1

60

5

2

Source: Categorical Data Analysis, Quaderni del Corso Estivo di Statistica e Calcolo delle
Probabilit`a, n. 4., Istituto di Metodi Quantitativi, Universit`a Luigi Bocconi, by R. Piccarreta.

5.26 Refer to Table 9.1, treating marijuana use as the response variable. Analyze these data.
5.27 The bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur; aarcdarcda.html. contains a five-way table relating occupational aspirations ЕҪhigh, low. to gender, residence, IQ, and socioeconomic status. Analyze these data.
Theory and Methods 5.28 For model ЕҪ5.1., show that СЁвҗІ ЕҪ x.rСЁ x s вҗӨвҗІ ЕҪ x.w1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x.x.

PROBLEMS

207

5.29 For model ЕҪ5.1., when вҗІ ЕҪ x. is small, explain why you can interpret expЕҪ вҗӨ . approximately as вҗІ ЕҪ x q 1.rвҗІ ЕҪ x..

5.30 Prove that the logistic regression curve ЕҪ5.1. has the steepest slope where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 21 . Generalize to model ЕҪ5.8..

5.31 The calibration problem is that of estimating x at which вҗІ ЕҪ x. s вҗІ 0. For the linear logit model, argue that a confidence interval is the set of
x values for which

вҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶx y logitЕҪвҗІ 0 . r varЕҪвҗЈЛҶ. q x 2 varЕҪ вҗӨЛҶ. q 2 x covЕҪвҗЈЛҶ,вҗӨЛҶ. 1r2 - zвҗЈ r2 .

wMorgan ЕҪ1992, Sec. 2.7. surveyed other approaches.x
5.32 A study for several professional sports of the effect of a playerвҖҷs draft position d ЕҪ d s 1, 2, 3, . . . . of selection from the pool of potential players in a given year on the probability вҗІ of eventually being named an all star used the model logitЕҪвҗІ . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ log d ЕҪS. M. Berry, Chance, 14:53бҺҗ57, 2001.. a. Show that вҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ . s eвҗЈ d вҗӨ. Show that eвҗЈ s odds for the first draft pick.
b. In the United States, Berry reported вҗЈЛҶ s 2.3 and вҗӨЛҶs y1.1 for pro basketball and вҗЈЛҶ s 0.7 and вҗӨЛҶs y0.6 for pro baseball. This sug-
gests that in basketball a first draft pick is more crucial and picks with high d are relatively less likely to be all-stars. Explain why.
5.33 For the population of subjects having Y s j, X has a NЕҪвҗ®j, вҗҙ 2 . distribution, j s 0,1.
a. Using Bayes theorem, show that PЕҪY s 1 < x. satisfies the logistic regression model with вҗӨ s ЕҪвҗ®1 y вҗ®0.rвҗҙ 2.
b. Suppose that ЕҪ X < Y s j. is NЕҪвҗ®j,вҗҙj2 . with вҗҙ0 / вҗҙ1. Show that the logistic model holds with a quadratic term ЕҪAnderson 1975.. wProblem 5.4 showed that a quadratic term is helpful when x values have quite different dispersion at y s 0 and y s 1. This result also suggests that to test equality of means of normal distributions when the variances differ, one can fit a quadratic logistic regression with the two groups as the response and test the quadratic term; see OвҖҷBrien ЕҪ1988..x
c. Suppose that ЕҪ X < Y s j. has exponential dispersion family density f ЕҪ x; вҗӘj. s expГ„w xвҗӘj y bЕҪвҗӘj.xraЕҪвҗҫ . q cЕҪ x, вҗҫ .4. Find the relevant logistic model.

208

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

d. For multiple predictors, suppose that ЕҪX < Y s j. has a multivariate NЕҪвҗ® j, вҢә. distribution, j s 0, 1. Show that PЕҪY s 1 < x. satisfies logistic regression with effect parameters вҢәy1ЕҪвҗ®1 y вҗ®0. ЕҪCornfield 1962..

5.34 Suppose that вҗІ ЕҪ x. s FЕҪ x. for some strictly increasing cdf F. Explain why a monotone transformation of x exists such that the logistic regression model holds. Generalize to alternative link functions.

5.35 For an I = 2 contingency table, consider logit model ЕҪ5.4.. a. Given Г„вҗІi ) 04, show how to find Г„ вҗӨi4 satisfying вҗӨI s 0.
b. Prove that вҗӨ1 s вҗӨ2 s РёРёРё s вҗӨI is the independence model. Find its
likelihood equation, and show that вҗЈЛҶ s logitwЕҪГқi yi.rЕҪГқi ni.x.

5.36 Construct the log-likelihood function for the model logitwвҗІ ЕҪ x.x s вҗЈ q
вҗӨ x with independent binomial outcomes of y0 successes in n0 trials at x s 0 and y1 successes in n1 trials at x s 1. Derive the likelihood
equations, and show that вҗӨЛҶ is the sample log odds ratio.

5.37 A study has ni independent binary observations Г„ yi1, . . . , yini4 when X s xi, i s 1, . . . , N, with n s Гқi ni. Consider the model logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi, where вҗІi s PЕҪYi j s 1.. a. Show that the kernel of the likelihood function is the same treating the data as n Bernoulli observations or N binomial observations.
b. .For the saturated model, explain why the likelihood function is different for these two data forms. ЕҪ Hint: The number of parameters differs.. Hence, the deviance reported by software depends on the form of data entry.
c. Explain why the difference between deviances for two unsaturated models does not depend on the form of data entry.
d. Suppose that each ni s 1. Show that the deviance depends on вҗІЛҶi
but not yi. Hence, it is not useful for checking model fit ЕҪsee also Problem 4.22..

5.38 Suppose that Y has a bin ЕҪ n, вҗІ . distribution. For the model, logitЕҪвҗІ .
s вҗЈ , consider testing H0: вҗЈ s 0 ЕҪi.e., вҗІ s 0.5.. Let вҗІЛҶ s yrn. a. From Section 3.1.6, the asymptotic variance of вҗЈЛҶ s logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ . is
w nвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .xy1. Compare the estimated SE for the Wald test and
the SE using the null value of вҗІ , using test statistic wlogitЕҪвҗІЛҶ .rSEx2.
Show that the ratio of the Wald statistic to the statistic with null SE
equals 4вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶ .. What is the implication about performance of the Wald test if < вҗЈ < is large and вҗІЛҶ tends to be near 0 or 1?

PROBLEMS

209

b. Wald inference depends on the parameterization. How does the
comparison of tests change with the scale wЕҪвҗІЛҶ y 0.5.rSEx2, where SE is now the estimated or null SE of вҗІЛҶ ?
c. Suppose that y s 0 or y s n. Show that the Wald test in part ЕҪa. cannot reject H0: вҗІ s вҗІ 0 for any 0 - вҗІ 0 - 1, whereas the Wald test in part ЕҪb. rejects every such вҗІ 0. w Note: Analogous results apply for inference about the Poisson mean versus the log mean; see Mantel ЕҪ1987a..x
5.39 Find the likelihood equations for model ЕҪ5.10.. Show that they imply the fitted values and that the sample values are identical in the marginal two-way tables.
5.40 Consider the linear logit model ЕҪ5.5. for an I = 2 table, with yi a bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. variate. a. Show that the log likelihood is

I

I

LЕҪ вҗӨ. s Гқ yi ЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xi . y Гқ ni log 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xi . .

is1

is1

b. Show that the sufficient statistic for вҗӨ is Гқi yi xi, and explain why this is essentially the variable utilized in the CochranбҺҗArmitage test. ЕҪHence that test is a score test of H0: вҗӨ s 0..
c. Letting S s Гқi yi, show that the likelihood equations are

S s Гқ ni expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .
i 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .

Гқ yi xi s Гқ ni xi expЕҪвҗЈ . q вҗӨ xi .

i

i

1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .

d. Let Г„ вҗ®ЛҶi s niвҗІЛҶi4. Explain why Гқi вҗ®ЛҶi s Гқi yi and

Гқ xi s yi Гқ xi вҗ®ЛҶi .

iS

i Гқa вҗ®ЛҶ a

Explain why this implies that the mean score on x across the rows in the first column is the same for the model fit as for the observed data. They are also identical for the second column.

210

LOGISTIC REGRESSION

5.41 Let Yi be bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi. at xi, and let pi s yirni. For binomial GLMs with logit link:
a. For pi near вҗІi, show that

pi

вҗІi

pi y вҗІ i

log 1 y pi f log 1 y вҗІi q вҗІi ЕҪ1 y вҗІi . .

b. Show that ziЕҪt. in ЕҪ5.23. is a linearized version of the ith sample
logit, evaluated at approximation вҗІiЕҪt. for вҗІЛҶi.
$
c. Verify the formula ЕҪ5.20. for covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ ..

5.42 Using graphs or tables, explain what is meant by no interaction in
modeling response Y and explanatory X and Z when: a. All variables are continuous ЕҪmultiple regression.. b. Y and X are continuous, Z is categorical ЕҪanalysis of covariance.. c. Y is continuous, X and Z are categorical ЕҪtwo-way ANOVA.. d. Y is binary, X and Z are categorical ЕҪlogit model..

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 6
Building and Applying Logistic Regression Models
Having studied the basics of fitting and interpreting logistic regression models, we now turn our attention to building and applying them. With several explanatory variables, there are many potential models. In Section 6.1 we discuss strategies for model selection. After choosing a preliminary model, model checking addresses whether systematic lack of fit exists. Section 6.2 covers diagnostics, such as residuals, for model checking.
In practice, a common application compares two groups on a binary response, with data stratified by control variables. In Section 6.3 we present logit-related analyses of such data. In Section 6.4 we show the advantages of a well-chosen model in enhancing inferential power for detecting and estimating associations. Section 6.5 covers power and sample size determination for logistic regression. Although the logit is the most popular link function for probabilities, other links are sometimes more appropriate. In Section 6.6 we present models using the probit link and links making a double log transform.
For small samples or models with many parameters, ordinary large-sample ML inference may perform poorly. In Section 6.7 we discuss conditional logistic regression. Like small-sample methods for 2 = 2 tables, this uses conditioning arguments to eliminate nuisance parameters.
6.1 STRATEGIES IN MODEL SELECTION
Model selection for logistic regression faces the same issues as for ordinary regression. The selection process becomes harder as the number of explanatory variables increases, because of the rapid increase in possible effects and interactions. There are two competing goals: The model should be complex enough to fit the data well. On the other hand, it should be simple to interpret, smoothing rather than overfitting the data.
211

212

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

Most studies are designed to answer certain questions. Those questions guide the choice of model terms. Confirmatory analyses then use a restricted set of models. For instance, a study hypothesis about an effect may be tested by comparing models with and without that effect. For studies that are exploratory rather than confirmatory, a search among possible models may provide clues about the dependence structure and raise questions for future research.
In either case, it is helpful first to study the effect on Y of each predictor by itself using graphics ЕҪincorporating smoothing. for a continuous predictor or a contingency table for a discrete predictor. This gives a вҖҳвҖҳfeelвҖҷвҖҷ for the marginal effects. Unbalanced data, with relatively few responses of one type, limit the number of predictors for the model. One guideline suggests at least 10 outcomes of each type should occur for every predictor ЕҪPeduzzi et al. 1996.. If y s 1 only 30 times out of n s 1000, for instance, the model should contain no more than about three x terms. Such guidelines are approximate, and this does not mean that if you have 500 outcomes of each type you are well served by a model with 50 predictors.
Many model selection procedures exist, no one of which is always best. Cautions that apply to ordinary regression hold for any generalized linear model. For instance, a model with several predictors may suffer from multicollinearityбҺҸcorrelations among predictors making it seem that no one variable is important when all the others are in the model. A variable may seem to have little effect because it overlaps considerably with other predictors in the model, itself being predicted well by the other predictors. Deleting such a redundant predictor can be helpful, for instance to reduce standard errors of other estimated effects.

6.1.1 Horseshoe Crab Example Revisited
The horseshoe crab data set in Table 4.3 has four predictors: color ЕҪfour categories., spine condition ЕҪthree categories., weight, and width of the carapace shell. We now fit a logistic regression model using all these to predict whether the female crab has satellites ЕҪ y s 1..
We start by fitting a model containing main effects,

logit

PЕҪ Y s 1.

s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1weight q вҗӨ2width q вҗӨ3 c1 q вҗӨ4 c2 q вҗӨ5 c3 q вҗӨ6 s1 q вҗӨ7 s2 ,

treating color ЕҪci. and spine condition ЕҪ sj. as qualitative ЕҪfactors., with dummy variables for the first three colors and the first two spine conditions.
Table 6.1 shows results. A likelihood-ratio test that Y is jointly independent of these predictors simultaneously tests H0: вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨ7 s 0. The test statistic equals 40.6 with df s 7 ЕҪ P - 0.0001.. This shows extremely strong
evidence that at least one predictor has an effect.

STRATEGIES IN MODEL SELECTION

213

TABLE 6.1 Computer Output from Fitting Model with All Main Effects to Horseshoe Crab Data

Testing Global Null Hypothesis: BETA = 0

Test

Chi- Square

DF

Pr > ChiSq

Likelihood Ratio

40.5565

7

<.0001

Parameter Intercept weight width color 1 color 2 color 3 spine 1 spine 2

Analysis of Maximum Likelihood Estimates

Estimate

Std Error

Chi- Square

y9.2734

3.8378

5.8386

0.8258

0.7038

1.3765

0.2631

0.1953

1.8152

1.6087

0.9355

2.9567

1.5058

0.5667

7.0607

1.1198

0.5933

3.5624

y0.4003

0.5027

0.6340

y0.4963

0.6292

0.6222

Pr > ChiSq 0.0157 0.2407 0.1779 0.0855 0.0079 0.0591 0.4259 0.4302

Although the overall test is highly significant, the Table 6.1 results are discouraging. The estimates for weight and width are only slightly larger than their SE values. The estimates for the factors compare each category to the final one as a baseline. For color, the largest difference is less than two standard errors; for spine condition, the largest difference is less than a standard error.
The small P-value for the overall test, yet the lack of significance for individual effects, is a warning sign of multicollinearity. In Section 5.2.2 we showed strong evidence of a width effect. Controlling for weight, color, and spine condition, little evidence remains of a partial width effect. However, weight and width have a strong correlation ЕҪ0.887.. For practical purposes they are equally good predictors, but it is nearly redundant to use them both. Our further analysis uses width ЕҪW . with color ЕҪC. and spine condition ЕҪS. as predictors. For simplicity, we symbolize models by their highest-order terms, regarding C and S as factors. For instance, ЕҪC q S q W . denotes a model with main effects, whereas ЕҪC q S*W . denotes a model that has those main effects plus an S = W interaction. It is not usually sensible to consider a model with interaction but not the main effects that make up that interaction.
6.1.2 Stepwise Procedures
In exploratory studies, an algorithmic method for searching among models can be informative if we use results cautiously. Goodman ЕҪ1971a. proposed methods analogous to forward selection and backward elimination in ordinary regression.
Forward selection adds terms sequentially until further additions do not improve the fit. At each stage it selects the term giving the greatest improve-

214

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

ment in fit. The minimum P-value for testing the term in the model is a sensible criterion, since reductions in deviance for different terms may have different df values. A stepwise variation of this procedure retests, at each stage, terms added at previous stages to see if they are still significant.
Backward elimination begins with a complex model and sequentially removes terms. At each stage, it selects the term for which its removal has the least damaging effect on the model ЕҪe.g., largest P-value.. The process stops when any further deletion leads to a significantly poorer fit. With either approach, for qualitative predictors with more than two categories, the process should consider the entire variable at any stage rather than just individual dummy variables. Add or drop the entire variable rather than just one of its dummies. Otherwise, the result depends on the coding. The same remark applies to interactions containing that variable.
Many statisticians prefer backward elimination over forward selection, feeling it safer to delete terms from an overly complex model than to add terms to an overly simple one. Forward selection can stop prematurely because a particular test in the sequence has low power. Neither strategy necessarily yields a meaningful model. Use variable selection procedures with caution! When you evaluate many terms, one or two that are not important may look impressive simply due to chance. For instance, when all the true effects are weak, the largest sample effect may substantially overestimate its true effect. See Westfall and Wolfinger ЕҪ1997. and Westfall and Young ЕҪ1993. for ways to adjust P-values to take multiple tests into account.
Some software has additional options for selecting a model. One approach attempts to determine the best model with some fixed number of terms, according to some criterion. If such a method and backward and forward selection procedures yield quite different models, this is an indication that such results are of dubious use. Another such indication would be when a quite different model results from applying a given procedure to a bootstrap sample of the same size from the sample distribution.
Finally, statistical significance should not be the sole criterion for inclusion of a term in a model. It is sensible to include a variable that is central to the purposes of the study and report its estimated effect even if it is not statistically significant. Keeping it in the model may help reduce bias in estimated effects of other predictors and may make it possible to compare results with other studies where the effect is significant ЕҪperhaps because of a larger sample size.. Algorithmic selection procedures are no substitute for careful thought in guiding the formulation of models.

6.1.3 Backward Elimination for Horseshoe Crab Example
Table 6.2 summarizes results of fitting and comparing several logit models to the horseshoe crab data with predictors width, color, and spine condition. The deviance ЕҪG2 . test of fit compares the model to the saturated model. As noted in Sections 5.2.4 and 5.2.5, this is not approximately chi-squared when a predictor is continuous, as width is. However, the difference of deviances

STRATEGIES IN MODEL SELECTION

215

TABLE 6.2 Results of Fitting Several Logistic Regression Models to Horseshoe Crab Data

Model Predictors a

Deviance

Models Deviance Corr.

G2 df AIC Compared Difference rЕҪ y,вҗ®ЛҶ.

1 ЕҪC*S*W .

170.44 152 212.4 бҺҸ

бҺҸ

2 ЕҪC*S q C*W q S*W . 173.68 155 209.7 ЕҪ2.бҺҗЕҪ1. 3.2 ЕҪdf s 3.

3a ЕҪC*S q S*W .

177.34 158 207.3 ЕҪ3a.бҺҗЕҪ2. 3.7 ЕҪdf s 3.

3b ЕҪC*W q S*W .

181.56 161 205.6 ЕҪ3b.бҺҗЕҪ2. 7.9 ЕҪdf s 6.

3c ЕҪC*S q C*W .

173.69 157 205.7 ЕҪ3c.бҺҗЕҪ2. 0.0 ЕҪdf s 2.

4a ЕҪS q C*W .

181.64 163 201.6 ЕҪ4a.бҺҗЕҪ3c. 8.0 ЕҪdf s 6.

4b ЕҪW q C*S.

177.61 160 203.6 ЕҪ4b.бҺҗЕҪ3c. 3.9 ЕҪdf s 3.

5 ЕҪC q S q W .

186.61 166 200.6 ЕҪ5.бҺҗЕҪ4b. 9.0 ЕҪdf s 6.

6a ЕҪC q S.

208.83 167 220.8 ЕҪ6a.бҺҗЕҪ5. 22.2 ЕҪdf s 1.

6b ЕҪS q W .

194.42 169 202.4 ЕҪ6b.бҺҗЕҪ5. 7.8 ЕҪdf s 3.

6c ЕҪC q W .

187.46 168 197.5 ЕҪ6c.бҺҗЕҪ5. 0.8 ЕҪdf s 2.

7a ЕҪC.

212.06 169 220.1 ЕҪ7a.бҺҗЕҪ6c. 24.5 ЕҪdf s 1.

7b ЕҪW .

194.45 171 198.5 ЕҪ7b.бҺҗЕҪ6c. 7.0 ЕҪdf s 3.

8 ЕҪC s dark q W .

187.96 170 194.0 ЕҪ8.бҺҗЕҪ6c. 0.5 ЕҪdf s 2.

9 None

225.76 172 227.8 ЕҪ9.бҺҗЕҪ8. 37.8 ЕҪdf s 2.

0.452 0.285 0.402 0.447 0.000

aC, color; S, spine condition; W, width.

between two models that differ by a modest number of parameters is relevant. That difference is the likelihood-ratio statistic y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. comparing the models, and it has an approximate null chi-squared distribution..
To select a model, we use backward elimination. We test only the highest-order terms for each variable. It is inappropriate, for instance, to remove a main effect term if the model has interactions involving that term.
We begin with the most complex model, symbolized by ЕҪC*S*W ., model 1 in Table 6.2. This model uses main effects for each term as well as the three two-factor interactions and the three-factor interaction. It allows a separate width effect at each CS combination. ЕҪIn fact, at some of those combinations y outcomes of only one type occur, so effects are not estimable.. The likelihood-ratio statistic comparing this model to the simpler model ЕҪC*S q C*W q S*W . removing the three-factor interaction term equals 3.2 ЕҪdf s 3.. This suggests that the three-factor term is not needed ЕҪ P s 0.36., thank goodness, so we continue the simplification process.
In the next stage we consider the three models that remove a two-factor interaction. Of these, ЕҪC*S q C*W . gives essentially the same fit as the more complex model, so we drop the S = W interaction. Next, we consider dropping one of the other two-factor interactions. The model ЕҪS q C*W ., dropping the C = S interaction, has an increased deviance of 8.0 on df s 6 ЕҪ P s 0.24.; the model ЕҪW q C*S., dropping the C = W interaction, has an increased deviance of 3.9 on df s 3 ЕҪ P s 0.27.. Neither increase is important, suggesting that we can drop either and proceed. In either case, dropping next the remaining interaction also seems permissible. For instance,

216

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

dropping the C = S interaction from model ЕҪW q C*S., leaving model ЕҪC q S q W ., increases the deviance by 9.0 on df s 6 ЕҪ P s 0.17..
The working model now has the main effects alone. In the next stage we consider dropping one of them. Table 6.2 shows little consequence of removing S. Both remaining variables ЕҪC and W . then have nonnegligible effects. For instance, removing C increases the deviance ЕҪcomparing models 7b and 6c. by 7.0 on df s 3 ЕҪ P s 0.07.. The analysis in Section 5.4.6 revealed a noticeable difference between dark crabs ЕҪcategory 4. and the others. The simpler model that has a single dummy variable for color, equaling 0 for dark crabs and 1 otherwise, fits essentially as well. ЕҪThe deviance difference between models 8 and 6c equals 0.5, with df s 2.. Further simplification results in large increases in deviance and is unjustified.

6.1.4 AIC, Model Selection, and the Correct Model
In selecting a model, we are mistaken if we think that we have found the true one. Any model is a simplification of reality. For instance, width does not exactly have a linear effect on the probability of satellites, whether we use the logit link or the identity link.
What is the logic of testing the fit of a model when we know that it does not truly hold? A simple model that fits adequately has the advantages of model parsimony. If a model has relatively little bias, describing reality well, it tends to provide more accurate estimates of the quantities of interest. This was discussed in Sections 3.3.7 and 5.2.2 and is examined further in Section 6.4.5.
Other criteria besides significance tests can help select a good model in terms of estimating quantities of interest. The best known is the Akaike information criterion ЕҪAIC.. It judges a model by how close its fitted values tend to be to the true values, in terms of a certain expected value. Even though a simple model is farther from the true model than is a more complex model, it may be preferred because it tends to provide better estimates of certain characteristics of the true model, such as cell probabilities. Thus, the optimal model is the one that tends to have fit closest to reality. Given a sample, Akaike showed that this criterion selects the model that minimizes
AIC s y2ЕҪmaximized log likelihoodбҺҸnumber of parameters in model. .
This penalizes a model for having many parameters. With models for categorical Y, this ordering is equivalent to one based on an adjustment of the deviance, wG2 y 2ЕҪdf.x, by twice its residual df. For cogent arguments supporting this criterion, see Burnham and Anderson ЕҪ1998..
We illustrate AIC for model selection using the models Table 6.2 lists. That table also shows the AIC values. Of models using the three basic variables, AIC is smallest ЕҪAIC s 197.5. for C q W, having main effects of color and width. The simpler model having a dummy variable for whether a crab is dark fares better yet ЕҪAIC s 194.0.. Either model seems reasonable.

STRATEGIES IN MODEL SELECTION

217

We should balance the lower AIC for the simpler model against its having been suggested by the fit of C q W.

6.1.5 Using Causal Hypotheses to Guide Model Building
Although selection procedures are helpful exploratory tools, the model-building process should utilize theory and common sense. Often, a time ordering among the variables suggests possible causal relationships. Analyzing a certain sequence of models helps to investigate those relationships ЕҪGoodman 1973..
We illustrate with Table 6.3, from a British study. A sample of men and women who had petitioned for divorce and a similar number of married people were asked: ЕҪa. вҖҳвҖҳBefore you married your ЕҪformer. husbandrwife, had you ever made love with anyone else?вҖҷвҖҷ; ЕҪb. вҖҳвҖҳDuring your ЕҪformer. marriage, ЕҪdid you have. have you had any affairs or brief sexual encounters with another manrwoman?вҖҷвҖҷ The 2 = 2 = 2 = 2 table has variables G s gender, E s whether reported extramarital sex, P s whether reported premarital sex, and M s marital status.
The time points at which responses on the four variables occur suggests the following ordering of the variables:

G gender

6 6 6

P premarital
sex

E extramarital
sex

M marital status

Any of these is an explanatory variable when a variable listed to its right is the response. Figure 6.1 shows one possible causal structure. In this figure, a variable at the tip of an arrow is a response for a model at some stage. The explanatory variables have arrows pointing to the response, directly or indirectly.
We first treat P as a response. Figure 6.1 predicts that G has a direct effect on P, so the model of independence of these variables is inadequate.

TABLE 6.3 Marital Status by Report of Pre- and Extramarital Sex (PMS and EMS)

Marital Status

PMS: EMS:

Gender

Women

Men

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No

Divorced Still married

17 54 4 25

36 214 4 322

28 60 11 42

17 68 4 130

Source: G. N. Gilbert, Modelling Society ЕҪLondon: George Allen & Unwin, 1981.. Reprinted with permission from Unwin Hyman Ltd.

218

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

FIGURE 6.1 Causal diagram for Table 6.3.

At the second stage, E is the response. Figure 6.1 predicts that P and G have direct effects on E. It also suggests that G has an indirect effect on E, through its effect on P. These effects on E can be analyzed using the logit model for E with additive G and P effects. If G has only an indirect effect on E, the model with P alone as a predictor is adequate; that is, controlling for P, E and G are conditionally independent. At the third stage, M is the response. Figure 6.1 predicts that E has a direct effect on M, P has direct effects and indirect effects through its effects on E, and G has indirect effects through its effects on P and E. This suggests the logit model for M having additive E and P effects. For this model, G and M are independent, given P and E.
Table 6.4 shows results. The first stage, having P as the response, shows strong evidence of a GP association. The sample odds ratio for their marginal table is 0.27; the estimated odds of premarital sex for females are 0.27 times that for males. The second stage has E as the response. Only weak evidence occurs that G had a direct as well as an indirect effect on E, as G2 drops by 2.9 ЕҪdf s 1. after adding G to a model already containing P as a predictor. For this model, the estimated EP conditional odds ratio is 4.0.
The third stage has M as the response. Figure 6.1 specifies the logit model with main effects of E and P, but it fits poorly. The model that allows an

TABLE 6.4 Goodness of Fit of Various Models for Table 6.3a

Stage

Response Variable

Potential Explanatory

Actual Explanatory

1

P

2

E

3

M

G G, P
G, P, E

None ЕҪG. None ЕҪP. ЕҪG q P. ЕҪE q P. ЕҪ E*P. ЕҪ E*P q G.

aP, premarital sex; E, extramarital sex; M, marital status; G, gender.

G2

df

75.3

1

0.0

0

48.9

3

2.9

2

0.0

1

18.2

5

5.2

4

0.7

3

LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS

219

E = P interaction in their effects on M but assumes conditional independence of G and M fits much better ЕҪG2 decrease of 13.0, df s 1.. The model that also has a main effect for G fits slightly better yet. Either model is more complicated than Figure 6.1 predicted, since the effects of E on M vary according to the level of P. However, some preliminary thought about causal relationships suggested a model similar to one giving a good fit. We leave it to the reader to estimate and interpret effects for the third stage.

6.1.6 New Model-Building Strategies for Data Mining
As computing power continues to explode, enormous data sets are more common. A financial institution that markets credit cards may have observations for millions of subjects to whom they sent advertising, on whether they applied for a card. For their customers, they have monthly data on whether they paid their bill on time plus information on many variables measured on the credit card application. The analysis of huge data sets is called data mining.
Model building for huge data sets is challenging. There is currently considerable study of alternatives to traditional statistical methods, including automated algorithms that ignore concepts such as sampling error or modeling. Significance tests are usually irrelevant, as nearly any variable has a significant effect if n is sufficiently large. Model-building strategies view some models as useful for prediction even if they have complex structure. Nonetheless, a point of diminishing returns still occurs in adding predictors to models. After a point, new predictors tend to be so correlated with a linear combination of ones already in the model that they do not improve predictive power. For large n, inference is less relevant than summary measures of predictive power. This is a topic of the next section.

6.2 LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS
In Section 5.2.3 we introduced statistics for checking model fit in a global sense. After selecting a preliminary model, we obtain further insight by switching to a microscopic mode of analysis. In contingency tables, for instance, the pattern of lack of fit revealed in cell-by-cell comparisons of observed and fitted counts may suggest a better model. For continuous predictors, graphical displays are also helpful. Such diagnostic analyses may suggest a reason for the lack of fit, such as nonlinearity in the effect of an explanatory variable.
6.2.1 Pearson, Deviance, and Standardized Residuals
With categorical predictors, it is useful to form residuals to compare observed and fitted counts. Let yi denote the binomial variate for ni trials at

220

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

setting i of the explanatory variables, i s 1, . . . , N. Let вҗІЛҶi denote the model estimate of PЕҪY s 1.. Then niвҗІЛҶi is the fitted number of successes. For a
GLM with binomial random component, the Pearson residual ЕҪ4.36. for this fit is

' ei s

yi y niвҗІЛҶi var $ЕҪ Yi . 1r2 s

yi y niвҗІЛҶi niвҗІЛҶi ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi . .

ЕҪ 6 .1.

This divides the raw residual ЕҪ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi. by the estimated binomial standard
deviation of yi. The Pearson statistic for testing the model fit satisfies

N
X 2 s Гқ ei2 .
is1

Each squared Pearson residual is a component of X 2.
With вҗІЛҶi replaced by вҗІi in the numerator of ЕҪ6.1., ei is the difference

between a binomial random variable and its expectation, divided by its

estimated standard deviation. For large ni, ei then has an approximate

NЕҪ0, 1. distribution, when the model holds. Since вҗІi is estimated by вҗІЛҶi and

the Г„вҗІЛҶi4 depend on Г„ yi4, however, Г„ yi y niвҗІЛҶi4 tend to be smaller than

Г„ yi y niвҗІi4 and the Г„ ei4 are less variable than NЕҪ0, 1.. If X 2 has df s вҗҜ , X 2

s Гқi ei2 is asymptotically comparable to the sum of squares of вҗҜ ЕҪrather than

N . independent standard normal random variables. Thus, when the model

holds,

E

ЕҪГқ

i

e

2 i

.rN

f

вҗҜrN

-

1.

The standardized Pearson residual is slightly larger in absolute value and is approximately NЕҪ0, 1. when the model holds. In Section 4.5.5 we showed

the adjustment uses the leverage from an estimated hat matrix. For observa-
tion i with leverage ЛҶhi, the standardized residual is

' ' ei
1 y ri s ЛҶhi s

yi y niвҗІЛҶi
niвҗІЛҶi ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi . ЕҪ1 y ЛҶhi . .

Absolute values larger than roughly 2 or 3 provide evidence of lack of fit.

An alternative residual uses components of the G2 fit statistic. These are the deВ®iance residuals, introduced for GLMs in ЕҪ4.35.. The deviance residual

for observation i is

'di = signЕҪ yi y niвҗІЛҶi . ,

ЕҪ 6 .2.

where

Еҫ / di s 2 yi log q yi ЕҪ ni y yi . log ni . y yi

n iвҗІЛҶ i

ni y niвҗІЛҶi

This also tends to be less variable then NЕҪ0, 1. and can be standardized.

LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS

221

Plots of residuals against explanatory variables or linear predictor values
may detect a type of lack of fit. When fitted values are very small, however, just as X 2 and G2 lose relevance, so do residuals. When explanatory
variables are continuous, often ni s 1 at each setting. Then yi can equal only 0 or 1, and ei can assume only two values. One must then be cautious about regarding either outcome as extreme, and a single residual is usually uninfor-
mative. Plots of residuals also then have limited use, consisting simply of two
parallel lines of dots. The deviance itself is then completely uninformative ЕҪProblem 5.37.. When data can be grouped into sets of observations having
common predictor values, it is better to compute residuals for the grouped
data than for individual subjects.

6.2.2 Heart Disease Example A sample of male residents of Framingham, Massachusetts, aged 40 through 59, were classified on several factors, including blood pressure ЕҪTable 6.5.. The response variable is whether they developed coronary heart disease during a six-year follow-up period.
Let вҗІi be the probability of heart disease for blood pressure category i. The table shows the fit and the standardized Pearson residuals for two logistic regression models. The first model,
logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ ,
treats the response as independent of blood pressure. Some residuals for that model are large. This is not surprising, since the model fits poorly ЕҪG2 s 30.0, X 2 s 33.4, df s 7..

TABLE 6.5 Standardized Pearson Residuals for Logit Models Fitted to Data on Blood Pressure and Heart Disease

Blood Pressure

Sample Size

Observed Heart Disease

Fitted

Indep. Model

Linear Logit

Residual

Indep. Model

Linear Logit

- 117

156

3

117бҺҗ126

252

17

127бҺҗ136

284

12

137бҺҗ146

271

16

147бҺҗ156

139

12

157бҺҗ166

85

8

167бҺҗ186

99

16

) 186

43

8

Source: Data from Cornfield ЕҪ1962..

10.8

5.2

y2.62 y1.11

17.4

10.6

y0.12

2.37

19.7

15.1

y2.02 y0.95

18.8

18.1

y0.74 y0.57

9.6

11.6

0.84

0.13

5.9

8.9

0.93 y0.33

6.9

14.2

3.76

0.65

3.0

8.4

3.07 y0.18

222

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

TABLE 6.6 Residuals Reported in SAS for Heart Disease Data of Table 6.5 a

Observ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

disease 3
17 12 16 12
8 16
8

Observation Statistics

n

blood

Reschi

156 111.5 y0.9794

252 121.5

2.0057

284 131.5 y0.8133

271 141.5 y0.5067

139 151.5

0.1176

85 161.5 y0.3042

99 176.5

0.5135

43 191.5 y0.1395

aReschi, Pearson residual; StReschi, adjusted residual.

Resdev y1.0617
1.8501 y0.8420 y0.5162
0.1170 y0.3088
0.5050 y0.1402

StReschi y1.1058
2.3746 y0.9453 y0.5727
0.1261 y0.3261
0.6520 y0.1773

A plot of the residuals show an increasing trend. This suggests the linear logit model,
logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi ,
with scores Г„ xi4 for blood pressure level. We used scores ЕҪ111.5, 121.5, 131.5, 141.5, 151.5, 161.5, 176.5, 191.5.. The nonextreme scores are midpoints for the intervals of blood pressure. The trend in residuals disappears for this model, and only the second category shows some evidence of lack of fit.
Table 6.6 reports residuals for the linear logit model, as reported by SAS. The Pearson residuals ЕҪReschi., deviance residuals ЕҪResdev., and standardized Pearson residuals ЕҪStReschi. show similar results. Each is somewhat large in the second category. One relatively large residual is not surprising, however. With many residuals, some may be large purely by chance. Here the

FIGURE 6.2 Observed and predicted proportions of heart disease for linear logit model.

LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS

223

overall fit statistics ЕҪG2 s 5.9, X 2 s 6.3 with df s 6. do not indicate problems. In analyzing residual patterns, we should be cautious about attributing patterns to what might be chance variation from a model.
Another useful graphical display for showing lack of fit compares observed and fitted proportions by plotting them against each other or by plotting both of them against explanatory variables. For the linear logit model, Figure 6.2 plots both the observed proportions and the estimated probabilities of heart disease against blood pressure. The fit seems decent.
Studying residuals helps us understand either why a model fits poorly or where there is lack of fit in a generally good-fitting model. The next example illustrates the second case.

6.2.3 Graduate Admissions Example
Table 6.7 refers to graduate school applications to the 23 departments in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Florida during the 1997бҺҗ1998 academic year. It cross-classifies applicantвҖҷs gender ЕҪG., whether admitted ЕҪ A., and department ЕҪ D. to which the prospective students applied. We consider logit models with A as the response variable. Let yik denote the number admitted and let вҗІik denote the probability of admission for gender i in department k. We treat Г„Yik4 as independent bin ЕҪ nik , вҗІik .. Other things being equal, one would hope the admissions decision is independent of gender. However, the model with no gender effect, given the department,
logitЕҪвҗІ ik . s вҗЈ q вҗӨkD ,
fits rather poorly ЕҪG2 s 44.7, X 2 s 40.9, df s 23..

TABLE 6.7 Data Relating Admission to Gender and Department for Model with No Gender Effect

Dept anth astr chem clas comm comp engl geog geol germ hist lati

Females

Yes No

32 81

6

0

12 43

3

1

52 149

8

7

35 100

9

1

6

3

17

0

9

9

26

7

Males

Yes No

21 41

3

8

34 110

4

0

5 10

6 12

30 112

11 11

15

6

4

1

21 19

25 16

Std. Res (Fem,Yes)
y0.76 2.87
y0.27 y1.07 y0.63
1.16 0.94 2.17 y0.26 1.89 y0.18 1.65

Dept ling math phil phys poli psyc reli roma soci stat zool

Females

Yes No

21 10

25 18

3

0

10 11

25 34

2 123

3

3

29 13

16 33

23

9

4 62

Males Yes No
78 31 37
96 25 53 39 49
4 41 02 63 7 17 36 14 10 54

Std. Res (Fem,Yes)
1.37 1.29 1.34 1.32 y0.23 y2.27 1.26 0.14 0.30 y0.01 y1.76

Source: Data courtesy of James Booth.

224

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

Table 6.7 also reports standardized Pearson residuals for the number of females who were admitted for this model. For instance, the astronomy department admitted 6 females, which was 2.87 standard deviations higher than the model predicted. Each department has only a single nonredundant standardized residual, because of marginal constraints for the model. The
model has fit вҗІЛҶik s ЕҪ y1k q y2 k .rnqk , corresponding to an independence fit ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1k s вҗІЛҶ 2 k . in each partial table. Now, y1k y n1kвҗІЛҶ 1k s y1k y n1kЕҪ y1k q y2 k .rnqk s ЕҪ n2 krnqk . y1k y ЕҪ n1krnqk . y2 k s yЕҪ y2 k y n2 kвҗІЛҶ 2 k .. Thus, standard errors of ЕҪ y1k y n1kвҗІЛҶ 1k . and ЕҪ y2 k y n2 kвҗІЛҶ 2 k . are identical. The stan-
dardized residuals are identical in absolute value for males and females but of different sign. Astronomy admitted 3 males, and their standardized residual was y2.87; the number admitted was 2.87 standard deviations fewer than predicted. This is another advantage of standardized over ordinary Pearson residuals. The model of independence in a partial table has df s 1. Only one bit of information exists about how the data depart from independence, yet the ordinary Pearson residual for males need not equal the ordinary Pearson residual for females.
Departments with large standardized Pearson residuals reveal the reason for the lack of fit. Significantly more females were admitted than the model predicts in the astronomy and geography departments, and fewer in the psychology department. Without these three departments, the model fits reasonably well ЕҪG2 s 24.4, X 2 s 22.8, df s 20..
For the complete data, adding a gender effect to the model does not provide an improved fit ЕҪG2 s 42.4, X 2 s 39.0, df s 22., because the departments just described have associations in different directions and of greater magnitude than other departments. This model has an ML estimate of 1.19 for the GA conditional odds ratio, the odds of admission being 19% higher for females than males, given department. By contrast, the marginal table collapsed over department has a GA sample odds ratio of 0.94, the overall odds of admission being 6% lower for females. This illustrates SimpsonвҖҷs paradox ЕҪSection 2.3.2., the conditional association having different direction than the marginal association.

6.2.4 Influence Diagnostics for Logistic Regression
Other regression diagnostic tools are also helpful in assessing fit. These include plots of ordered residuals against normal percentiles ЕҪHaberman 1973a. and analyses that describe an observationвҖҷs influence on parameter estimates and fit statistics. Whenever a residual indicates that a model fits an observation poorly, it can be informative to delete the observation and refit the model to remaining ones. This is equivalent to adding a parameter to the model for that observation, forcing a perfect fit for it.
As in ordinary regression, an observation may be relatively influential in determining parameter estimates. The greater an observationвҖҷs leverage, the greater its potential influence. The fit could be quite different if an

LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS

225

observation that appears to be an outlier on y and has large leverage is deleted. However, a single observation can have a more exorbitant influence in ordinary regression than a single binary observation in logistic regression, since there is no bound on the distance of yi from its expected value. Also, in Section 4.5.5 we observed that the GLM estimated hat matrix

$
Hat

s

WЛҶ

1r2

X

ЕҪ

XX

WЛҶ X.

y1

XX

WЛҶ

1r2

depends on the fit as well as the model matrix X. For logistic regression, in
Section 5.5.2 we showed that the weight matrix WЛҶ is diagonal with element wЛҶi s niвҗІЛҶiЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi. for the ni observations at setting i of predictors. Points
that have extreme predictor values need not have high leverage. In fact, the
leverage can be small if вҗІЛҶi is close to 0 or 1.
Several measures that describe the effect on parameter estimates and fit
statistics of removing an observation from the data set are related algebraically to the observationвҖҷs leverage ЕҪPregibon 1981; Williams 1987.. In
logistic regression, the observation could be a single binary response or a
binomial response for a set of subjects all having the same predictor values.
Influence measures for each observation include:

1. For each model parameter, the change in the parameter estimate when the observation is deleted. This change, divided by its standard error, is called Dfbeta.
2. A measure of the change in a joint confidence interval for the parameters produced by deleting the observation. This confidence interval displacement diagnostic is denoted by c.
3. The change in X 2 or G2 goodness-of-fit statistics when the observation is deleted.

For each measure, the larger the value, the greater the influence. We illustrate them using the linear logit model with blood pressure as a predictor for heart disease in Table 6.5. Table 6.8 contains simple approximations ЕҪdue to Pregibon 1981. for the Dfbeta measure for the coefficient of blood pressure, the confidence interval diagnostic c, the change in G2, and the change in X 2. ЕҪThis is the square of the standardized Pearson residual, ri2.. All their values show that deleting the second observation has the greatest effect. This is not surprising, as that observation has the only relatively large residual. By contrast, Table 6.8 also contains the changes in X 2 and G2 for deleting observations in fitting the independence model. At the low and high ends of the blood pressure values, several changes are very large. However, these all relate to removing an entire binomial sample at a blood pressure level instead of removing a single subjectвҖҷs binary observation. Such subjectlevel deletions have little effect even for this model.
With continuous or multiple predictors, it can be informative to plot these diagnostics, for instance against the estimated probabilities. See Cook and

226

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

TABLE 6.8 Diagnostic Measures for Logistic Regression Models Fitted to Heart Disease Data

Blood Pressure Dfbeta c

Pearson Likelihood-Ratio Pearson Likelihood-Ratio

X 2 Diff.

G2 Diff.

X 2 Diff.a

G2 Diff.a

111.5

0.49 0.34 1.22

1.39

6.86

9.13

121.5 y1.14 2.26 5.64

5.04

0.02

0.02

131.5

0.33 0.31 0.89

0.94

4.08

4.56

141.5

0.08 0.09 0.33

0.34

0.55

0.57

151.5

0.01 0.00 0.02

0.02

0.70

0.66

161.5 y0.07 0.02 0.11

0.11

0.87

0.80

176.5

0.40 0.26 0.42

0.42

14.17

10.83

191.5 y0.12 0.02 0.03

0.03

9.41

6.73

aIndependence model; other values refer to model with blood pressure predictor. Source: Data from Cornfield ЕҪ1962..

Weisberg ЕҪ1999, Chap. 22., Fowlkes ЕҪ1987., and Landwehr et al. ЕҪ1984. for examples of useful diagnostic plots.

6.2.5 Summarizing Predictive Power: R and R-Squared Measures
In ordinary regression, R2 describes the proportional reduction in variation in comparing the conditional variation of the response to the marginal variation. It and the multiple correlation R describe the power of the explanatory variables to predict the response, with R s 1 for perfect prediction. Despite various attempts to define analogs for categorical response models, no proposed measure is as widely useful as R and R2. We present a few proposed measures in this section.
For any GLM, the correlation rЕҪ y, вҗ®ЛҶ. between the observed responses Г„ yi4 and the modelвҖҷs fitted values Г„вҗ®ЛҶi4 measures predictive power. For least
squares regression, this is the multiple correlation between Y and the predictors. An advantage of the correlation relative to its square is the appeal of working on the original scale and its approximate proportionality to effect size: For a small effect with a single predictor, doubling the slope corresponds roughly to doubling the correlation. This measure can be useful for comparing fits of different models to the same data set.
In logistic regression, вҗ®ЛҶi for a particular model is the estimated probability вҗІЛҶi for binary observation i. Table 6.2 shows rЕҪ y, вҗ®ЛҶ. for a few models fitted to
the horseshoe crab data. Width alone has r s 0.402, and adding color to the model increases r to 0.452. The simpler model that uses color merely to indicate whether a crab is dark does essentially as well, with r s 0.447. The complex model containing color, spine condition, width, and all their twoand three-way interactions has r s 0.526. This seems considerably higher, but with multiple predictors the r estimates become more highly biased in estimating the true correlation. It can be misleading to compare r values for models with greatly different df values. After a jackknife adjustment designed

LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS

227

to reduce bias, there is little difference between r for this overly complex model and the simpler model ЕҪZheng and Agresti 2000.. Little is lost and much is gained by using the simpler model.
Another way to measure the association between the binary responses Г„ yi4
and their fitted values Г„вҗІЛҶi4 uses the proportional reduction in squared error

Гқi ЕҪ yi y вҗІЛҶi . 2 1 y Гқi ЕҪ yi y y . 2 ,

obtained by using вҗІЛҶi instead of y s Гқ yirn as a predictor of yi ЕҪEfron 1978..
Amemiya ЕҪ1981. suggested a related measure that weights squared deviations
by inverse predicted variances. For logistic regression, unlike normal GLMs,
these and rЕҪ y, вҗ®ЛҶ. need not be nondecreasing as the model gets more
complex. Like any correlation-type measure, they can depend strongly on the
range of observed values of explanatory variables.
Other measures directly use the likelihood function. Denote the maxi-
mized log likelihood by LM for a given model, LS for the saturated model, and L0 for the null model containing only an intercept term. Probabilities are no greater than 1.0, so log likelihoods are nonpositive. As the model
complexity increases, the parameter space expands, so the maximized log
likelihood increases. Thus, L0 F LM F LS F 0. The measure

LM y L0 LS y L0

ЕҪ 6 .3.

falls between 0 and 1. It equals 0 when the model provides no improvement in fit over the null model, and it equals 1 when the model fits as well as the saturated model. A weakness is the log likelihood is not an easily interpretable scale. Interpreting the numerical value is difficult, other than in a comparative sense for different models.
For n independent Bernoulli observations, the maximized log likelihood is

n
log ЕҒ вҗІЛҶiyi ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi .1yy i
is1

n
sГқ
is1

yi log вҗІЛҶi q ЕҪ1 y yi . log ЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi . .

The null model gives вҗІЛҶi s ЕҪГқ yi.rn s y, so that L0 s n y ЕҪlog y . q ЕҪ1 y y . log ЕҪ1 y y . .

The saturated model has a parameter for each subject and implies that

228

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

вҗІЛҶi s yi for all i. Thus, LS s 0 and ЕҪ6.3. simplifies to

L0 y LM

Ds

.

L0

McFadden ЕҪ1974. proposed this measure. With multiple observations at each setting of explanatory variables, the
data file can take the grouped-data form of N binomial counts rather than n Bernoulli indicators. The saturated model then has a parameter for each count. It gives N fitted proportions equal to the N sample proportions of success. Then LS is nonzero and ЕҪ6.3. takes a different value than when calculated using individual subjects. For N binomial counts, the maximized likelihoods are related to the G2 goodness-of-fit statistic by G2ЕҪ M . s y2ЕҪ LM y LS ., so ЕҪ6.3. becomes
G2 ЕҪ0. y G2 ЕҪ M . D* s G2 ЕҪ0. .

Goodman ЕҪ1971a. and Theil ЕҪ1970. discussed this and related partial association measures.
With grouped data D* can be large even when predictive power is weak at the subject level. For instance, a model can fit much better than the null model even though fitted probabilities are close to 0.5 for the entire sample. In particular, D* s 1 when it fits perfectly, regardless of how well one can predict individual subjectвҖҷs responses on Y with that model. Also, suppose that the population satisfies the given model, but not the null model. As the sample size n increases with number of settings N fixed, G2ЕҪ M . behaves like a chi-squared random variable but G2ЕҪ0. grows unboundedly. Thus, D* в„ў 1 as n в„ў Пұ, and its magnitude tends to depend on n. This measure confounds model goodness of fit with predictive power. Similar behavior occurs for R2 in regression analyses when calculated using means of Y values ЕҪrather than individual subjects. at N different x settings. It is more sensible to use D for binary, ungrouped data.

6.2.6 Summarizing Predictive Power: Classification Tables and ROC Curves
A classification table cross-classifies the binary response with a prediction of
whether y s 0 or 1. The prediction is ЛҶy s 1 when вҗІЛҶi ) вҗІ 0 and ЛҶy s 0 when вҗІЛҶi F вҗІ 0, for some cutoff вҗІ 0. Most classification tables use вҗІ 0 s 0.5 and
summarize predictive power by
sensitivity s P ЕҪ ЛҶy s 1 < y s 1. and specificity s P ЕҪ ЛҶy s 0 < y s 0.

LOGISTIC REGRESSION DIAGNOSTICS

229

FIGURE 6.3 ROC curve for logistic regression model with horseshoe crab data.
ЕҪRecall Sections 2.1.2.. Limitations of this table are that it collapses continu-
ous predictive values вҗІЛҶ into binary ones, the choice of вҗІ 0 is arbitrary, and it
is highly sensitive to the relative numbers of times y s 1 and y s 0. A receiВ®er operating characteristic ЕҪROC. curve is a plot of sensitivity as a
function of ЕҪ1 y specificity. for the possible cutoffs вҗІ 0. This curve usually has a concave shape connecting the points ЕҪ0, 0. and ЕҪ1, 1.. The higher the area under the curve, the better the predictions. The ROC curve is more informative than the classification table, since it summarizes predictive power for all possible вҗІ 0. Figure 6.3 shows how PROC LOGISTIC in SAS reports the ROC curve for the model for the horseshoe crabs using width and color as predictors.
The area under a ROC curve is identical to the value of another measure of predictive power, the concordance index. Consider all pairs of observations ЕҪi, j. such that yi s 1 and yj s 0. The concordance index c estimates the probability that the predictions and the outcomes are concordant, the obser-
vation with the larger y also having the larger вҗІЛҶ ЕҪHarrell et al. 1982.. A value
c s 0.5 means predictions were no better than random guessing. This corresponds to a model having only an intercept term and an ROC curve that is a straight line connecting points ЕҪ0, 0. and ЕҪ1, 1.. For the horseshoe crab data, c s 0.639 with color alone as a predictor, 0.742 with width alone, 0.771 with

230

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

width and color, and 0.772 with width and a dummy for whether a crab has dark color.
ROC curves are a popular way of evaluating diagnostic tests. Sometimes such tests have J ) 2 ordered response categories rather than ЕҪpositive, negative.. The ROC curve then refers to the various possible cutoffs for defining a result to be positive. It plots sensitivity against 1 y specificity for the possible collapsings of the J categories to a ЕҪpositive, negative. scale wsee Toledano and Gatsonis ЕҪ1996.x.

6.3 INFERENCE ABOUT CONDITIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN 2 = 2 = K TABLES
The analysis of the graduate admissions data in Sections 6.2.3 used the model of conditional independence. This model is an important one in biomedical studies that investigate whether an association exists between a treatment variable and a disease outcome after controlling for a possibly confounding variable that might influence that association. In this section we review the test of conditional independence as a logit model analysis for a 2 = 2 = K contingency table. We also present a test ЕҪMantel and Haenszel 1959. that seems non-model-based but relates to the logit model.
We illustrate using Table 6.9, showing results of a clinical trial with eight centers. The study compared two cream preparations, an active drug and a

TABLE 6.9 Clinical Trial Relating Treatment to Response for Eight Centers

Response

Center Treatment Success Failure

1

Drug

11

25

Control

10

27

2

Drug

16

4

Control

22

10

3

Drug

14

5

Control

7

12

4

Drug

2

14

Control

1

16

5

Drug

6

11

Control

0

12

6

Drug

1

10

Control

0

10

7

Drug

1

4

Control

1

8

8

Drug

4

2

Control

6

1

Source: Beitler and Landis ЕҪ1985..

Odds Ratio 1.19 1.82 4.80 2.29 Пұ Пұ 2.0 0.33

вҗ® 11 k 10.36 14.62 10.50 1.45 3.52 0.52 0.71 4.62

varЕҪ n11 k . 3.79 2.47 2.41 0.70 1.20 0.25 0.42 0.62

INFERENCE ABOUT CONDITIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN 2 = 2 = K TABLES

231

control, on their success in curing an infection. This table illustrates a common pharmaceutical application, comparing two treatments on a binary response with observations from several strata. The strata are often medical centers or clinics; or they may be levels of age or severity of the condition being treated or combinations of levels of several control variables; or they may be different studies of the same sort evaluated in a meta analysis.

6.3.1 Using Logit Models to Test Conditional Independence
For a binary response Y, we study the effect of a binary predictor X, controlling for a qualitative covariate Z. Let вҗІik s PЕҪY s 1 < X s i, Z s k.. Consider the model

logitЕҪвҗІik . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi q вҗӨkZ , i s 1, 2, k s 1, . . . , K , ЕҪ6.4.

where x1 s 1 and x2 s 0. This model assumes that the XY conditional odds ratio is the same at each category of Z, namely expЕҪ вҗӨ .. The null hypothesis
of XY conditional independence is H0: вҗӨ s 0. The Wald statistic is ЕҪвҗӨЛҶrSE.2.
The likelihood-ratio statistic is the difference between G2 statistics for the reduced model

logitЕҪвҗІ ik . s вҗЈ q вҗӨkZ

ЕҪ 6 .5.

and the full model. These tests are sensible when X has a similar effect at each category of Z. They have df s 1.
Alternatively, since the reduced model ЕҪ6.5. is equivalent to conditional independence of X and Y, one could test conditional independence using a goodness-of-fit test of that model. That test has df s K when X is binary. This corresponds to comparing model ЕҪ6.5. and the saturated model, which permits вҗӨ / 0 and contains XZ interaction parameters. When no interaction exists or when interaction exists but it has minor substantive importance, it follows from results to be presented in Section 6.4.2 that this approach is less powerful, especially when K is large. However, when the direction of the XY association varies among categories of Z, it can be more powerful.

6.3.2 CochranвҖ“MantelвҖ“Haenszel Test of Conditional Independence
Mantel and Haenszel ЕҪ1959. proposed a non-model-based test of H0: conditional independence in 2 = 2 = K tables. Focusing on retrospective studies of disease, they treated response ЕҪcolumn. marginal totals as fixed. Thus, in each partial table k of cell counts Г„ni jk4, their analysis conditions on both the predictor totals ЕҪ n1qk , n2qk 4 and the response outcome totals ЕҪ nq1 k , nq2 k .. The usual sampling schemes then yield a hypergeometric distribution ЕҪ3.16. for the first cell count n11 k in each partial table. That count determines Г„ n12 k , n21 k , n22 k4, given the marginal totals.

232

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

Under H0, the hypergeometric mean and variance of n11 k are
вҗ®11 k s E ЕҪ n11 k . s n1qk nq1 krnqqk varЕҪ n11 k . s n1qk n2qk nq1 k nq2 krnqqk 2 ЕҪ nqqk y 1. .

Cell counts from different partial tables are independent. The test statistic combines information from the K tables by comparing Гқk n11 k to its null expected value. It equals

CMH s

Гқk ЕҪ n11 k y вҗ®11 k . 2 Гқk varЕҪ n11 k . .

ЕҪ 6 .6.

This statistic has a large-sample chi-squared null distribution with df s 1. When the odds ratio вҗӘX YЕҪk. ) 1 in partial table k, we expect that ЕҪ n11 k y
вҗ®11 k . ) 0. When вҗӘX YЕҪk. ) 1 in every partial table or вҗӘX YЕҪk. - 1 in each table, ГқkЕҪ n11 k y вҗ®11 k . tends to be relatively large in absolute value. This test works best when the XY association is similar in each partial table. In this sense it is similar to the tests of H0: вҗӨ s 0 in logit model ЕҪ6.4.. When the sample sizes in the strata are moderately large, this test usually gives similar results. In fact, it is a score test ЕҪSection 1.3.3. of H0: вҗӨ s 0 in that model ЕҪDay and Byar 1979..
Cochran ЕҪ1954. proposed a similar statistic. He treated the rows in each 2 = 2 table as two independent binomials rather than a hypergeometric. CochranвҖҷs statistic is ЕҪ6.6. with var ЕҪ n11 k . replaced by
varЕҪ n11 k . s n1qk n2qk nq1 k nq2 krnqqk 3 .
Because of the similarity in their approaches, we call ЕҪ6.6. the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel ЕҪCMH. statistic. The Mantel and Haenszel approach using the hypergeometric is more general in that it also applies to some cases in which the rows are not independent binomial samples from two populations. Examples are retrospective studies and randomized clinical trials with the available subjects randomly allocated to two treatments. In the first case the column totals are naturally fixed. In the second, under the null hypothesis the column margins are the same regardless of how subjects were assigned to treatments, and randomization arguments lead to the hypergeometric in each 2 = 2 table.
Mantel and Haenszel ЕҪ1959. proposed ЕҪ6.6. with a continuity correction. The P-value from the test then better approximates an exact conditional test ЕҪSection 6.7.5. but it tends to be conservative. The CMH statistic generalizes for I = J = K tables ЕҪSection 7.5.3..

6.3.3 Multicenter Clinical Trial Example
For the multicenter clinical trial, Table 6.9 reports the sample odds ratio for each table and the expected value and variance of the number of successes

INFERENCE ABOUT CONDITIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN 2 = 2 = K TABLES

233

for the drug treatment ЕҪ n11 k . under H0: conditional independence. In each table except the last, the sample odds ratio shows a positive association.
Thus, it makes sense to combine results with CMH s 6.38, with df s 1. There is considerable evidence against H0 ЕҪ P s 0.012..
Similar results occur in testing H0: вҗӨ s 0 in logit model ЕҪ6.4.. The model
fit has вҗӨЛҶs 0.777 with SE s 0.307. The Wald statistic is ЕҪ0.777r0.307.2 s 6.42
ЕҪ P s 0.011.. The likelihood-ratio statistic equals 6.67 ЕҪ P s 0.010..

6.3.4 CMH Test and Sparse Data*
In summary, for logit model ЕҪ6.4., CMH is the score statistic alternative to the likelihood-ratio or Wald test of H0: вҗӨ s 0. As n в„ў Пұ with fixed K, the tests have the same asymptotic chi-squared behavior under H0. An advantage of CMH is that its chi-squared limit also applies with an alternative asymptotic scheme in which K в„ў Пұ as n в„ў Пұ. The asymptotic theory for likelihood-ratio and Wald tests requires the number of parameters ЕҪand hence K . to be fixed, so it does not apply to this scheme. An application of this type is when each stratum has a single matched pair of subjects, one in each group.
With strata of matched pairs, n1qk s n2qk s 1 for each k. Then n s 2 K, so K в„ў Пұ as n в„ў Пұ. Table 6.10 shows the data layout for this situation. When both subjects in stratum k make the same response ЕҪas in the first case in Table 6.10., nq1 k s 0 or nq2 k s 0. Given the marginal counts, the internal counts are then completely determined, and вҗ®11 k s n11 k and var ЕҪ n11 k . s 0. When the subjects make differing responses ЕҪas in the second case., nq1 k s nq2 k s 1, so that вҗ®11 k s 0.5 and var ЕҪ n11 k . s 0.25. Thus, a matched pair contributes to the CMH statistic only when the two subjectsвҖҷ responses differ. Let K * denote the number of the K tables that satisfy this. Although each n11 k can take only two values, the central limit theorem implies that Гқk n11 k is approximately normal for large K *. Thus, the distribution of CMH is approximately chi-squared.
Usually, when K grows with n, each stratum has few observations. There may be more than two observations, such as caseбҺҗcontrol studies that match several controls with each case. Contingency tables with relatively few observations are referred to as sparse. The nonstandard setting in which K в„ў Пұ as n в„ў Пұ is called sparse-data asymptotics. Ordinary ML estimation then breaks down because the number of parameters is not fixed, instead having the same order as the sample size. In particular, an approximate chi-squared distribution holds for the likelihood-ratio and Wald statistics for testing conditional

TABLE 6.10
Element of Pair
First Second

Stratum Containing a Matched Pair

Response

Success

Failure

1

0

1

0

Response

Success

Failure

1

0

0

1

234

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

independence only when the strata marginal totals generally exceed about 5 to 10 and K is fixed and small relative to n.

6.3.5 Estimation of Common Odds Ratio
It is more informative to estimate the strength of association than to test hypotheses about it. When the association seems stable among partial tables, it is helpful to combine the K sample odds ratios into a summary measure of conditional association. The logit model ЕҪ6.4. implies homogeneous association, вҗӘX YЕҪ1. s РёРёРё s вҗӘX YЕҪ K . s exp ЕҪ вҗӨ .. The ML estimate of the common
odds ratio is exp ЕҪ вҗӨЛҶ..
Other estimators of a common odds ratio are not model-based. Woolf ЕҪ1955. proposed an exponentiated weighted average of the K sample log odds ratios. Mantel and Haenszel ЕҪ1959. proposed that

вҗӘЛҶMH s s Гқk ЕҪ n11 k n22 k , rnqqk . Гқk p11 < k p22 < k nqqk Гқk ЕҪ n12 k n21 krnqqk . Гқk p12 < k p21 < k nqqk

ЕҪ 6 .7.

where pi j< k s ni jkrnqqk . This gives more weight to strata with larger sample sizes. It is preferred over the ML estimator when K is large and the data are
sparse. The ML estimator вҗӨЛҶ of the log odds ratio then tends to be too large
in absolute value. For sparse-data asymptotics with only a single matched
p
pair in each stratum, for instance, вҗӨЛҶв„ў 2 вҗӨ. wThis conВ®ergence in probability means that for any в‘Җ ) 0, PЕҪ < вҗӨЛҶy 2 вҗӨ < - в‘Җ . в„ў 1 as n в„ў Пұ; see Problem
10.24.x
Hauck ЕҪ1979. gave an asymptotic variance for logЕҪвҗӘЛҶMH . that applies for a fixed number of strata. In that case logЕҪвҗӘЛҶMH . is slightly less efficient than the ML estimator вҗӨЛҶ unless вҗӨ s 0 ЕҪTarone et al. 1983.. Robins et al. ЕҪ1986.
derived an estimated variance that applies both for these standard asymptotics with large n and fixed K and for sparse asymptotics in which K is also
large. Expressing вҗӘЛҶMH s RrS s ЕҪГқk Rk .rЕҪГқk Sk . with Rk s n11 k n22 krnqqk , their derivation showed that ЕҪlog вҗӘЛҶMH y log вҗӘ . is approximately proportional
to ЕҪ R y вҗӘ S.. They also showed that EЕҪ R y вҗӘ S. s 0 and derived the variance of ЕҪ R y вҗӘ S.. Their result is

вҗҙЛҶ 2 log вҗӘЛҶMH

s 2 1 Гқ nqyq1 k ЕҪ n11 k q n22 k . Rk
2R k

q 2 1 Гқ nyqq1 k ЕҪ n12 k q n21 k . Sk
2S k

q 1 Гқ nyqq1 k ЕҪ n11 k q n22 k . Sk q ЕҪ n12 k q n21 k . Rk .
2 RS k

INFERENCE ABOUT CONDITIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN 2 = 2 = K TABLES

235

For the eight-center clinical trial summarized by Table 6.9,
вҗӘЛҶMH s ЕҪ25 = 10. s ЕҪ11 = 27. r73 q РёРёРё qЕҪ2 = 6. r13 2.13. r73 q РёРёРё qЕҪ4 = 1. r13

For log вҗӘЛҶMH s 0.758, вҗҙЛҶwlog вҗӘЛҶMH x s 0.303. A 95% confidence interval for the
common odds ratio is expЕҪ0.758 " 1.96 = 0.303. or ЕҪ1.18, 3.87.. Similar results occur using model ЕҪ6.4.. The 95% confidence interval for expЕҪ вҗӨ . is exp ЕҪ0.777 " 1.96 = 0.307., or ЕҪ1.19, 3.97., using the Wald interval, and ЕҪ1.20, 4.02. using the likelihood-ratio interval. Although the evidence of an effect is considerable, inference about its size is rather imprecise. The odds of success may be as little as 20% higher with the drug, or they may be as much as four times as high.
If the true odds ratios are not identical but do not vary drastically, вҗӘЛҶMH
still is a useful summary of the conditional associations. Similarly, the CMH test is a powerful summary of evidence against H0: conditional independence, as long as the sample associations fall primarily in a single direction. It is not necessary to assume equality of odds ratios to use the CMH test.

6.3.6 Testing Homogeneity of Odds Ratios
The homogeneous association condition вҗӘX YЕҪ1. s РёРёРё s вҗӘX YЕҪ K . for 2 = 2 = K tables is equivalent to logit model ЕҪ6.4.. A test of homogeneous association is implicitly a goodness-of-fit test of this model. The usual G2 and X 2 test statistics provide this, with df s K y 1. They test that the K y 1 parameters in the saturated model that are the coefficients of interaction terms wcross products of the dummy variable for x with ЕҪ K y 1. dummy variables for categories of Z x all equal 0. Breslow and Day ЕҪ1980, p. 142. proposed an alternative large-sample test ЕҪNote 6.5..
For the eight-center clinical trial data in Table 6.9, G2 s 9.7 and X 2 s 8.0 ЕҪdf s 7. do not contradict the hypothesis of equal odds ratios. It is reasonable to summarize the conditional association by a single odds ratio ЕҪe.g.,
вҗӘЛҶMH s 2.1. for all eight partial tables. In fact, even with a small P-value in a
test of homogeneous association, if the variability in the sample odds ratios is
not substantial, a summary measure such as вҗӘЛҶMH is useful. A test of
homogeneity is not a prerequisite for this measure or for testing conditional independence.

6.3.7 Summarizing Heterogeneity in Odds Ratios
In practice, a predictor effect is often similar from stratum to stratum. In multicenter clinical trials comparing a new drug to a standard, for example, if the new drug is truly more beneficial, the true effect is usually positive in each stratum.

236

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

In strict terms, however, a model with homogeneous effects is unrealistic. First, we rarely expect the true odds ratio to be exactly the same in each stratum, because of unmeasured covariates that affect it. Breslow ЕҪ1976. discussed modeling of the log odds ratio using a set of explanatory variables. Second, the model regards the strata effects Г„ вҗӨkZ4 as fixed effects, treating them as the only strata of interest. Often the strata are merely a sampling of the possible ones. Multicenter clinical trials have data for certain centers but many other centers could have been used. Scientists would like their conclusions to apply to all such centers, not only those in the study.
A somewhat different logit model treats the true log odds ratios in partial tables as a random sample from a NЕҪвҗ®, вҗҙ 2 . distribution. Fitting the model yields an estimated mean log odds ratio and an estimated variability about that mean. The inference applies to the population of strata rather than only those sampled. This type of model uses random effects in the linear predictor to induce this extra type of variability. In Chapter 12 we discuss GLMs with random effects, and in Section 12.3.4 we fit such a model to Table 6.9.

6.4 USING MODELS TO IMPROVE INFERENTIAL POWER
When contingency tables have ordered categories, in Section 3.4 we showed that tests that utilize the ordering can have improved power. Testing independence against a linear trend alternative in a linear logit model ЕҪSections 5.3.4, and 5.4.6 . is a way to do this. In this section we present the reason for these power improvements.
6.4.1 Directed Alternatives Consider an I = 2 contingency table for I binomial variates with parameters Г„вҗІi4. H0: independence states
logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ .
The ordinary X 2 and G2 statistics of Section 3.2.1 refer to the general alternative,
logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ q вҗӨi ,
which is saturated. They test H0: вҗӨ1 s вҗӨ2 s РёРёРё s вҗӨI s 0 in that model, with df s ЕҪ I y 1.. Their general alternative treats both classifications as nominal. Denote these test statistics as G2ЕҪ I . and X 2ЕҪ I .. Recall that G2ЕҪ I . is the likelihood-ratio statistic G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. s y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. for comparing the saturated model M1 with the independence ЕҪ I . model M0.
Ordinal test statistics refer to narrower, usually more relevant, alternatives. With ordered rows, an example is a test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 in the linear logit

USING MODELS TO IMPROVE INFERENTIAL POWER

237

model, logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi. The likelihood-ratio statistic G2ЕҪ I < L. s G2ЕҪ I . y G2ЕҪ L. compares the linear logit model and the independence model. When a test statistic focuses on a single parameter, such as вҗӨ in that model, it has df s 1. Now, df equals the mean of the chi-squared distribution. A large test statistic with df s 1 falls farther out in its right-hand tail than a comparable value of X 2ЕҪ I . or G2ЕҪ I . with df s ЕҪ I y 1.. Thus, it has a smaller P-value.

6.4.2 Noncentral Chi-Squared Distribution

To compare power of G2ЕҪ I < L. and G2ЕҪ I ., it is necessary to compare their

nonnull sampling distributions. When H0 is false, their distributions are

approximately noncentral chi-squared. This distribution, introduced by R. A. Fisher in 1928, arises from the following construction: If Zi ; NЕҪвҗ®i, 1., i s 1, . . . , вҗҜ , and if Z1, . . . , ZвҗҜ are independent, ГқZi2 has the noncentral chisquared distribution with df s вҗҜ and noncentrality parameter вҗӯ s Гқ вҗ®i2. Its mean is вҗҜ q вҗӯ and its variance is 2ЕҪвҗҜ q 2 вҗӯ.. The ordinary ЕҪcentral. chi-

squared distribution, which occurs when H0 is true, has вҗӯ s 0.

Let

2
XвҗҜ ,вҗӯ

denote a noncentral

chi-squared

random variable with df s вҗҜ

and noncentrality вҗӯ. A fundamental result for chi-squared analyses is that,

for fixed вҗӯ,

P

2
XвҗҜ ,

вҗӯ

)

2
вҗ№вҗҜ

ЕҪвҗЈ.

increases as вҗҜ decreases .

That is, the power for rejecting H0 at a fixed вҗЈ-level increases as the df of the test decreases ЕҪe.g., Das Gupta and Perlman 1974.. For fixed вҗҜ , the power equals вҗЈ when вҗӯ s 0, and it increases as вҗӯ increases. The inverse relation between power and df suggests that focusing the noncentrality on a statistic having a small df value can improve power.

6.4.3 Increased Power for Narrower Alternatives Suppose that X has, at least approximately, a linear effect on logitw PЕҪY s 1.x. To test independence, it is then sensible to use a statistic having strong power for that effect. This is the purpose of the tests based on the linear logit model, using the likelihood-ratio statistic G2ЕҪ I < L., the Wald statistic z s
вҗӨЛҶrSE, and the CochranбҺҗArmitage ЕҪscore. statistic.
When is G2ЕҪ I < L. more powerful than G2ЕҪ I .? The statistics satisfy
G2ЕҪ I . s G2ЕҪ I < L. q G2ЕҪ L. ,
where G2ЕҪ L. tests goodness of fit of the linear logit model. When the linear logit model holds, G2ЕҪ L. has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with

238

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

df s I y 2; then if вҗӨ / 0, G2ЕҪ I . and G2ЕҪ I < L. both have approximate noncentral chi-squared distributions with the same noncentrality. Whereas df s I y 1 for G2ЕҪ I ., df s 1 for G2ЕҪ I < L.. Thus, G2ЕҪ I < L. is more powerful, since it uses fewer degrees of freedom.
When the linear logit model does not hold, G2ЕҪ I . has greater noncentrality than G2ЕҪ I < L., the discrepancy increasing as the model fits more poorly. However, when the model approximates reality fairly well, usually G2ЕҪ I < L. is still more powerful. That testвҖҷs df value of 1 more than compensates for its loss in noncentrality. The closer the true relationship is to the linear logit, the more nearly G2ЕҪ I < L. captures the same noncentrality as G2ЕҪ I ., and the more powerful it is compared to G2ЕҪ I .. To illustrate, Figure 6.4 plots power as a function of noncentrality when df s 1 and 7. When the noncentrality of a test having df s 1 is at least about half that of a test having df s 7, the test with df s 1 is more powerful. The linear logit model then helps detect a key component of an association. As Mantel ЕҪ1963. argued in a similar context, вҖҳвҖҳthat a linear regression is being tested does not mean that an assumption of linearity is being made. Rather it is that test of a linear component of regression provides power for detecting any progressive association which may exist.вҖҷвҖҷ
The improved power results from sacrificing power in other cases. The G2ЕҪ I . test can have greater power than G2ЕҪ I < L. when the linear logit model describes reality very poorly.
The remark about the desirability of focusing noncentrality holds for nominal variables also. For instance, consider testing conditional independence in 2 = 2 = K tables. One approach tests вҗӨ s 0 in model ЕҪ6.4., using df s 1. Another approach tests goodness of fit of model ЕҪ6.5., using df s K

FIGURE 6.4 Power and noncentrality, for df s 1 and df s 7, when вҗЈ s 0.05.

USING MODELS TO IMPROVE INFERENTIAL POWER

239

TABLE 6.11 Change in Clinical Condition by Degree of Infiltration

Clinical Change

Degree of Infiltration

High

Low

Proportion High

Worse

1

11

0.08

Stationary

13

53

0.20

Slight improvement

16

42

0.28

Moderate improvement

15

27

0.36

Marked improvement

7

11

0.39

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Biometric Society ЕҪCochran 1954..

ЕҪSection 6.3.1.. When model ЕҪ6.4. holds, both tests have the same noncentrality. Thus, the test of вҗӨ s 0 is more powerful, since is has fewer degrees of freedom.

6.4.4 Treatment of Leprosy Example
Table 6.11 refers to an experiment on the use of sulfones and streptomycin drugs in the treatment of leprosy. The degree of infiltration at the start of the experiment measures a type of skin damage. The response is the change in the overall clinical condition of the patient after 48 weeks of treatment. We use response scores Г„y1, 0, 1, 2, 34. The question of interest is whether subjects with high infiltration changed differently from those with low infiltration.
Here, the clinical change response variable is ordinal. It seems natural to compare the mean change for the two infiltration levels. Cochran ЕҪ1954. and Yates ЕҪ1948. noted that this analysis is identical to a trend test treating the binary variable as the response. That test is sensitive to linearity between clinical change and the proportion of cases with high infiltration.
The test G2ЕҪ I . s 7.28 ЕҪdf s 4. does not show much evidence of association ЕҪ P s 0.12., but it ignores the row ordering. The sample proportion of high infiltration increases monotonically as the clinical change improves. The test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 in the linear logit model has G2ЕҪ I < L. s 6.65, with df s 1 ЕҪ P s 0.01.. It gives strong evidence of more positive clinical change at the higher level of infiltration. Using the ordering by decreasing df from 4 to 1 pays a strong dividend. In addition, G2ЕҪ L. s 0.63 with df s 3 suggests that the linear trend model fits well.

6.4.5 Model Smoothing Improves Precision of Estimation
Using directed alternatives can improve not only test power, but also estimation of cell probabilities and summary measures. In generic form, let вҗІ be true cell probabilities in a contingency table, let p denote sample proportions,
and let вҗІЛҶ denote model-based ML estimates of вҗІ.

240

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

When вҗІ satisfy a certain model, both вҗІЛҶ for that model and p are consistent estimators of вҗІ. The model-based estimator вҗІЛҶ is better, as its true
asymptotic standard error cannot exceed that of p. This happens because of
model parsimony: The unsaturated model, on which вҗІЛҶ is based, has fewer
parameters than the saturated model, on which p is based. In fact, modelbased estimators are also more efficient in estimating functions gЕҪ вҗІ. of cell probabilities. For any differentiable function g,
asymp. var 'n g ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . F asymp. var 'n g ЕҪp. .

In Section 14.2.2 we prove this result. It holds more generally than for categorical data models ЕҪAltham 1984.. This is one reason that statisticians
prefer parsimonious models.
In reality, of course, a chosen model is unlikely to hold exactly. However,
when the model approximates вҗІ well, unless n is extremely large, вҗІЛҶ is still better than p. Although вҗІЛҶi is biased, it has smaller variance than pi, and MSEЕҪвҗІЛҶi. - MSEЕҪ pi. when its variance plus squared bias is smaller than
varЕҪ pi.. In Section 3.3.7 we showed that in two-way tables, independencemodel estimates of cell probabilities can be better than sample proportions
even when that model does not hold.

6.5 SAMPLE SIZE AND POWER CONSIDERATIONS*
In any statistical procedure, the sample size n influences the results. Strong effects are likely to be detected even when n is small. By contrast, detection of weak effects requires large n. A study design should reflect the sample size needed to provide good power for detecting the effect.
6.5.1 Sample Size and Power for Comparing Two Proportions For test statistics having large-sample normal distributions, power calculations can use ordinary methods. To illustrate, consider a test comparing binomial parameters вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 for two medical treatments. An experiment plans independent samples of size ni s nr2 receiving each treatment. The researchers expect вҗІi f 0.6 for each, and a difference of at least 0.10 is
important. In testing H0: вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 , the variance of the difference вҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 in
sample proportions is вҗІ 1ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1.rЕҪ nr2. q вҗІ 2ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 .rЕҪ nr2. f 0.6 = 0.4 = ЕҪ4rn. s 0.96rn. In particular,
ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . y ЕҪвҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 .
z s ЕҪ0.96rn. 1r2
has approximately a standard normal distribution for вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 near 0.6.

SAMPLE SIZE AND POWER CONSIDERATIONS

241

The power of an вҗЈ-level test of H0 is approximately

< вҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 < P ЕҪ 0.96rn. 1r2 G zвҗЈr2 .

When вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s 0.10, for вҗЈ s 0.05, this equals
P ЕҪ0.96rn. 1r2 ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 ) 1.96 y 0.10 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . y 0.10 ЕҪ nr0.96. 1r2 qP ЕҪ0.96rn. 1r2 ЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1 - y1.96 y 0.10 y вҗІЛҶ 2 . y 0.10 ЕҪ nr0.96. 1r2
s P z ) 1.96 y 0.10ЕҪ nr0.96. 1r2 q P z - y1.96 y 0.10ЕҪ nr0.96. 1r2 s 1 y вҢҪ 1.96 y 0.10ЕҪ nr0.96. 1r2 q вҢҪ y1.96 y 0.10ЕҪ nr0.96. 1r2 ,

where вҢҪ is the standard normal cdf. The power is approximately 0.11 when n s 50 and 0.30 when n s 200. It is not easy to attain significance when effects are small and the sample is not very large. Figure 6.5 shows how the power increases in n when вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s 0.1. By contrast, it shows how the power improves when вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 s 0.2.
For a given PЕҪtype I error. s вҗЈ and PЕҪtype II error. s вҗӨ ЕҪand hence power s 1 y вҗӨ ., one can determine the sample size needed to attain those

FIGURE 6.5 Approximate power for testing equality of proportions, with true values near middle of range and вҗЈ s 0.05.

242

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

values. A study using n1 s n2 requires approximately
n1 s n2 s ЕҪ zвҗЈ r2 q zвҗӨ . 2 вҗІ 1ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1 . q вҗІ 2 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 . rЕҪвҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2 . 2.
For a test with вҗЈ s 0.05 and вҗӨ s 0.10 when вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 are truly about 0.60 and 0.70, n1 s n2 s 473. This formula also provides the sample sizes needed for a comparable confidence interval for вҗІ 1 y вҗІ 2. With about 473 subjects in each group, a 95% confidence interval has only a 0.10 chance of containing 0 when actually, вҗІ 1 s 0.60 and вҗІ 2 s 0.70.
This sample-size formula is approximate and may underestimate slightly the actual values required. It is adequate for most practical work, though, in which only rough conjectures are available for вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2. Fleiss ЕҪ1981. showed more precise formulas.

6.5.2 Sample Size Determination in Logistic Regression
Consider now the model logitwвҗІ ЕҪ xi.x s вҗЈ q вҗҘ xi, i s 1, . . . , n, in which x is quantitative. wWe use вҗҘ so as not to confuse with вҗӨ s PЕҪtype II error..x The sample size needed to achieve a certain power for testing H0: вҗҘ s 0 depends
on the variance of вҗҘЛҶ. This depends on Г„вҗІ ЕҪ xi.4, and formulas for n use a guess for вҗІЛҶ s вҗІ ЕҪ x. and the distribution of X. The effect size is the log odds ratio вҗ¶
comparing вҗІ ЕҪ x. to вҗІ ЕҪ x q sx., the probability for a standard deviation above the mean of x. For a one-sided test when X is approximately normal, Hsieh ЕҪ1989. derived

n s zвҗЈ q zвҗӨ expЕҪyвҗ¶ 2r4. 2ЕҪ1 q 2вҗІЛҶвҗҰ . rЕҪвҗІЛҶвҗ¶ 2 . ,

where

вҗҰ s 1 q ЕҪ1 q вҗ¶ 2 . expЕҪ5вҗ¶ 2r4. r 1 q expЕҪyвҗ¶ 2r4. .

The value n decreases as вҗІЛҶ в„ў 0.5 and as < вҗ¶ < increases.
We illustrate for modeling the effect of x s cholesterol level on the probability of severe heart disease for a population for which that probability at an average level of cholesterol is about 0.08. Researchers want the test to be sensitive to a 50% increase in this probability, for a standard deviation increase in cholesterol. The odds of severe heart disease at the mean cholesterol level equal 0.08r0.92 s 0.087, and the odds one standard deviation above the mean equal 0.12r0.88 s 0.136. The odds ratio equals 0.136r0.087 s 1.57, and вҗ¶ s logЕҪ1.57. s 0.450. For вҗЈ s 0.05 and вҗӨ s 0.10, вҗҰ s 1.306 and n s 612.

6.5.3 Sample Size in Multiple Logistic Regression
A multiple logistic regression model requires larger n to detect effects. Let R denote the multiple correlation between the predictor X of interest and the

SAMPLE SIZE AND POWER CONSIDERATIONS

243

others in the model. The formula for n above divides by ЕҪ1 y R2 .. In that
formula, вҗІЛҶ is evaluated at the mean of all the explanatory variables, and the
odds ratio refers to the effect of X at the mean level of the other predictors. Consider the example in Section 6.5.2 when blood pressure is also a
predictor. If the correlation between cholesterol and blood pressure is 0.40, we need n f 612rw1 y ЕҪ0.40.2 x s 729.
These formulas provide, at best, rough indications of sample size. Most
applications have only a crude guess for вҗІЛҶ and R, and X may be far from
normally distributed. For other work on this problem, see Hsieh et al. ЕҪ1998. and Whittemore ЕҪ1981..

6.5.4 Power for Chi-Squared Tests in Contingency Tables
When hypotheses are false, squared normal and X 2 and G2 statistics have large-sample noncentral chi-squared distributions ЕҪSection 6.4.2.. Suppose that H0 is equivalent to model M for a contingency table. Let вҗІi denote the true probability in cell i, and let вҗІiЕҪ M . denote the value to which the ML
estimate вҗІЛҶi for model M converges, where ГқвҗІi s ГқвҗІiЕҪ M . s 1. For a
multinomial sample of size n, the noncentrality parameter for X 2 equals

вҗӯ вҗІ s n Гқ i y вҗІi ЕҪ M . 2 .

i

вҗІiЕҪ M.

ЕҪ 6 .8.

This has the same form as X 2, with вҗІi in place of the sample proportion pi
and вҗІiЕҪ M . in place of вҗІЛҶi. The noncentrality parameter for G2 equals

вҗӯ s 2 n Гқ вҗІi log вҗІi .

i

вҗІiЕҪ M.

ЕҪ 6 .9.

TABLE 6.12 Power of Chi-Squared Test for вҗЈ s 0.05
Noncentrality
df 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 7.0 10.0 15.0 25.0
1 .050 .073 .097 .121 .146 .170 .293 .410 .516 .609 .754 .885 .972 .998 2 .050 .065 .081 .098 .115 .133 .226 .322 .415 .504 .655 .815 .944 .996 3 .050 .062 .075 .088 .102 .116 .192 .275 .358 .440 .590 .761 .917 .993 4 .050 .060 .071 .082 .093 .106 .172 .244 .320 .396 .540 .716 .891 .989 6 .050 .058 .066 .075 .084 .094 .146 .206 .270 .336 .468 .644 .843 .980 8 .050 .057 .064 .071 .079 .087 .131 .182 .238 .296 .417 .588 .799 .968 10 .050 .056 .062 .068 .075 .082 .121 .166 .215 .268 .379 .542 .760 .956 20 .050 .053 .056 .060 .063 .066 .096 .125 .158 .193 .273 .402 .611 .883 50 .050 .052 .054 .056 .059 .061 .076 .092 .110 .129 .173 .250 .398 .687
Source: Reprinted with permission from G. E. Haynam, Z. Govindarajulu, and F. C. Leone, in Selected Tables in Mathematical Statistics, eds. H. L. Harter and D. B. Owen ЕҪChicago: Markham, 1970..

244

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

When H0 is true, all вҗІi s вҗІiЕҪ M .. Then, for either statistic, вҗӯ s 0 and the

central chi-squared distribution applies.

To determine the approximate power for a chi-squared test with df s вҗҜ ,

ЕҪ1. choose a hypothetical set of true values Г„вҗІi4, ЕҪ2. calculate Г„вҗІiЕҪ M .4 by

fitting to Г„вҗІi4 the model M for H0, ЕҪ3. calculate the noncentrality parameter

вҗӯ,

and

ЕҪ4.

calculate

Pw

2
XвҗҜ ,

вҗӯ

)

2
вҗ№вҗҜ

ЕҪвҗЈ.x.

Table

6.12

shows

an

excerpt

from

a

table of noncentral chi-squared probabilities for step 4 with вҗЈ s 0.05.

6.5.5 Power for Testing Conditional Independence
We use an example based on one in OвҖҷBrien ЕҪ1986.. A standard fetal heart rate monitoring test predicts whether a fetus will require nonroutine care following delivery. The standard test has categories ЕҪworrisome, reassuring.. The response Y is whether the newborn required some nonroutine medical care during the first week after birth ЕҪ1 s yes, 0 s no.. A new fetal heart rate monitoring test is developed, having categories ЕҪvery worrisome, somewhat worrisome, reassuring.. A physician plans to study whether this new test can help make predictions about the outcome; that is, given the result of the standard test, is there an association between the response and the result of the new test? A relevant statistic tests the effect of the new monitoring test in the logit model having the new test ЕҪ N . and standard test ЕҪS. as qualitative predictors.
To help select n, a statistician asks the physician to conjecture about the joint distribution of the explanatory variables, with questions such as вҖҳвҖҳWhat proportion of the cases do you think will be scored вҖҳreassuringвҖҷ by both tests?вҖҷвҖҷ For each NS combination, the physician also guessed PЕҪY s 1.. Table 6.13 shows one scenario for marginal and conditional probabilities. These yield a joint distribution Г„вҗІi jk4 from their product, such as 0.04 = 0.40 s 0.016 for the proportion of cases judged worrisome by the standard test and very worrisome by the new test and requiring nonroutine medical care. These joint probabilities yield fitted probabilities вҗІЕҪ M0. and вҗІЕҪ M1. for the null and alternative logit models. ЕҪOne can get these by entering Г„вҗІi jk4 in

TABLE 6.13 Scenario for Power Computation

Standard

Joint

New

Probability

Worrisome

Very worrisome

0.04

Somewhat worrisome

0.08

Reassuring

0.04

Reassuring

Very worrisome

0.02

Somewhat worrisome

0.18

Reassuring

0.64

Source: Reprinted with permission from OвҖҷBrien ЕҪ1986..

P ЕҪnonroutine care.
0.40 0.32 0.27 0.30 0.22 0.15

PROBIT AND COMPLEMENTARY LOG-LOG MODELS

245

percentage form as counts in software for logistic regression, fit the relevant model, and divide the fitted counts by 100 to get the fitted joint probabilities.. The likelihood-ratio test comparing these models has noncentrality ЕҪ6.9. with вҗІЕҪ M1. playing the role of вҗІ and вҗІЕҪ M0. playing the role of вҗІЕҪ M ..
For the scenario in Table 6.13, the noncentrality equals 0.00816 n, with df s 2. For n s 400, 600, and 1000, the approximate powers when вҗЈ s 0.05
are 0.35, 0.49, and 0.73. This scenario predicts 64% of the observations to
occur at only one combination of the factors. The lack of dispersion for the
factors weakens the power.

6.5.6 Effects of Sample Size on Model Selection and Inference
The effects of sample size suggest some cautions for model selection. For small n, the most parsimonious model accepted in a goodness-of-fit test may be quite simple. By contrast, larger samples usually require more complex models to pass goodness-of-fit tests. Then, some effects that are statistically significant may be weak and substantively unimportant. With large n it may be adequate to use a model that is simpler than models that pass goodnessof-fit tests. An analysis that focuses solely on goodness-of-fit tests is incomplete. It is also necessary to estimate model parameters and describe strengths of effects.
These remarks merely reflect limitations of significance testing. Null hypotheses are rarely true. With large enough n, they will be rejected. A more relevant concern is whether the difference between true parameter values and null hypothesis values is sufficient to be important. Many methodologists overemphasize testing and underutilize estimation methods such as confidence intervals. When the P-value is small, a confidence interval specifies the extent to which H0 may be false, thus helping us determine whether rejecting it has practical importance. When the P-value is not small, the confidence interval indicates whether some plausible parameter values are far from H0. A wide confidence interval containing the H0 value indicates that the test had weak power at important alternatives.

6.6 PROBIT AND COMPLEMENTARY LOG-LOG MODELS*

For binary responses, in this section we discuss two alternatives to logit models. Like the logit model, these models have form ЕҪ4.8.,

вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҢҪЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x .

ЕҪ 6 .10.

for a continuous cdf вҢҪ. The following argument motivates this class.

6.6.1 Tolerance Motivation for Binary Response Models
In toxicology, binary response models describe the effect of dosage of a toxin on whether a subject dies. The tolerance distribution provides justification for

246

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

model ЕҪ6.10.. Let x denote the dosage level. For a randomly selected subject, let Y s 1 if the subject dies. Suppose that the subject has tolerance T for the dosage, with ЕҪY s 1. equivalent to ЕҪT F x.. For instance, an insect survives if the dosage x is less than T and dies if the dosage is at least T. Tolerances vary among subjects, and let FЕҪt. s PЕҪT F t.. For fixed dosage x, the probability a randomly selected subject dies is
вҗІ ЕҪ x. sPЕҪYs1 < Xsx. sPЕҪT Fx. sFЕҪ x..

That is, the appropriate binary model is the one having the shape of the cdf F of the tolerance distribution. Let вҢҪ denote the standard cdf for the family to which F belongs. A common standardization uses the mean and standard deviation of T, so that
вҗІ ЕҪ x . s F ЕҪ x . s вҢҪ ЕҪ x y вҗ®. rвҗҙ .
Then, the model has form вҗІ ЕҪ x. s вҢҪЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x..

6.6.2 Probit Models

Toxicological experiments often measure dosage as the log concentration ЕҪBliss 1935.. Often, the tolerance distribution for the dosage is approximately NЕҪвҗ®, вҗҙ 2 . for unknown вҗ® and вҗҙ . If F is the NЕҪвҗ®, вҗҙ 2 . cdf, then вҗІ ЕҪ x. has the form вҗІ ЕҪ x. s вҢҪЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x., where вҢҪ is the standard normal cdf, вҗЈ s yвҗ®rвҗҙ and вҗӨ s 1rвҗҙ . In GLM form,

вҢҪy1 вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x

ЕҪ 6 .11.

is the probit model. The probit link function is вҢҪy1ЕҪРё.. Whereas the cdf maps the real line onto the ЕҪ0, 1. probability scale, the inverse cdf maps the ЕҪ0, 1. scale for вҗІ ЕҪ x. onto the real line values for linear predictors in binary

response models. The response curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x. wor for 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x., when вҗӨ - 0x has the

appearance of the normal cdf with mean вҗ® s yвҗЈrвҗӨ and standard deviation

вҗҙ s 1r < вҗӨ < . Since 68% of the normal density falls within a standard devia-

tion of the mean, 1r<вҗӨ< is the distance between x values where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.16

or 0.84 and where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.50. The rate of change in вҗІ ЕҪ x. is СЁвҗІ ЕҪ x.rСЁ x s

вҗӨвҗҫЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x., where вҗҫЕҪРё. is the standard normal density function. The rate is

highest when вҗЈ q вҗӨ x s 0 ЕҪi.e., at x s yвҗЈrвҗӨ ., where it equals вҗӨrЕҪ2вҗІ .1r2 s

0.40вҗӨ ЕҪfor вҗІ s 3.14 . . . .. At that point, вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 21 .

By comparison, in logistic regression with parameter вҗӨ, the curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x.

is a logistic cdf with standard deviation вҗІr<вҗӨ < '3 . Its rate of change in вҗІ ЕҪ x.

at

x s yвҗЈrвҗӨ

is 0.25вҗӨ. The rates

of

change

where

вҗІЕҪ x.

s

1 2

are the same

for the cdf вҖҷs corresponding to the probit and logistic curves when the logistic

вҗӨ is 0.40r0.25 s 1.6 times the probit вҗӨ. The standard deviations are the
same when the logistic вҗӨ is вҗІr'3 s 1.8 times the probit вҗӨ. When both

PROBIT AND COMPLEMENTARY LOG-LOG MODELS

247

models fit well, parameter estimates in logistic regression are about 1.6 to 1.8 times those in probit models.
The likelihood equations that ЕҪ4.24. showed for binomial regression models apply to probit models ЕҪsee also Problem 6.32.. One can solve them using the Fisher scoring algorithm for GLMs ЕҪBliss 1935, Fisher 1935b.. NewtonбҺҗRaphson yields the same ML estimates but slightly different standard errors. For the information matrix inverted to obtain the asymptotic covariance matrix, NewonбҺҗRaphson uses observed information, whereas Fisher scoring uses expected information. These differ for binary links other than the logit.

6.6.3 Beetle Mortality Example
Table 6.14 reports the number of beetles killed after 5 hours of exposure to gaseous carbon disulfide at various concentrations. Figure 6.6 plots ЕҪas dots. the proportion killed against the log concentration. The proportion jumps up at about x s 1.8, and it is close to 1 above there.
The ML fit of the probit model is
вҢҪy1 вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x . s y34.96 q 19.74 x.
For this fit, вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. s 0.5 at x s 34.96r19.74 s 1.77. The fit corresponds to a
normal tolerance distribution with вҗ® s 1.77 and вҗҙ s 1r19.74 s 0.05. The
curve for вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. is that of a NЕҪ1.77, 0.052 . cdf. At dosage xi with ni beetles, niвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ xi. is the fitted count for death,
i s 1, . . . , 8. Table 6.14 reports the fitted values and Figure 6.6 shows the fit. The table also shows fitted values for the linear logit model. These models fit similarly and rather poorly. The G2 goodness-of-fit statistic equals 11.1 for the logit model and 10.0 for the probit model, with df s 6.

TABLE 6.14 Beetles Killed after Exposure to Carbon Disulfide

Log Dose

Number of Beetles

Number Killed

Fitted Values Comp. Log-Log Probit

1.691

59

6

5.7

3.4

1.724

60

13

11.3

10.7

1.755

62

18

20.9

23.4

1.784

56

28

30.3

33.8

1.811

63

52

47.7

49.6

1.837

59

53

54.2

53.4

1.861

62

61

61.1

59.7

1.884

60

60

59.9

59.2

Source: Data reprinted with permission from Bliss ЕҪ1935..

Logit
3.5 9.8 22.4 33.9 50.0 53.3 59.2 58.8

248

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

FIGURE 6.6 Proportion of beetles killed versus log dosage, with fits of probit and complementary log-log models.

6.6.4 Complementary Log-Log Link Models The logit and probit links are symmetric about 0.5, in the sense that
link вҗІ ЕҪ x . s ylink 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x . .

To illustrate,

logit вҗІ ЕҪ x . s log вҗІ ЕҪ x . rЕҪ 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x . . s ylog ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x . . rвҗІ ЕҪ x . s ylogit 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x . .

This means that the response curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x. has a symmetric appearance about the point where вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 0.5, so вҗІ ЕҪ x. approaches 0 at the same rate it approaches 1. Logit and probit models are inappropriate when this is badly violated.
The response curve

вҗІ ЕҪ x . s 1 y exp yexpЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x .

ЕҪ 6 .12.

has the shape shown in Figure 6.7. It is asymmetric, вҗІ ЕҪ x. approaching 0 fairly slowly but approaching 1 quite sharply. For this model,

log ylogЕҪ 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x . . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x.

The link for this GLM is called the complementary log-log link, since the log-log link applies to the complement of вҗІ ЕҪ x..

PROBIT AND COMPLEMENTARY LOG-LOG MODELS

249

FIGURE 6.7 Model with complementary logбҺҗlog link.

To interpret model ЕҪ6.12., we note that at x1 and x2 ,
log ylogЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x2 . . y log ylogЕҪ1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x1 . . s вҗӨ ЕҪ x2 y x1 . ,

so that and

log 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x2 . log 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x1 .

s exp вҗӨ ЕҪ x2 y x1 .

1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x2 . s 1 y вҗІ ЕҪ x1 . exp w вҗӨ ЕҪ x2yx 1.x.

For x2 y x1 s 1, the complement probability at x2 equals the complement probability at x1 raised to the power expЕҪ вҗӨ ..
A related model to ЕҪ6.12. is

вҗІ ЕҪ x . s exp yexpЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ x . .

ЕҪ 6 .13.

For it, вҗІ ЕҪ x. approaches 0 sharply but approaches 1 slowly. As x increases, the curve is monotone decreasing when вҗӨ ) 0, and monotone increasing when вҗӨ - 0. In GLM form it uses the log-log link

log ylogЕҪ вҗІ ЕҪ x . . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x.

When the complementary log-log model holds for the probability of a success, the log-log model holds for the probability of a failure.
Model ЕҪ6.13. with log-log link is the special case of ЕҪ6.10. with cdf of the extreme В®alue ЕҪor Gumbel. distribution. The cdf equals
F ЕҪ x . s expГ„yexp yЕҪ x y a. rb 4

250

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

for parameters b ) 0 and yПұ - a - Пұ. It has mean a q 0.577b and
standard deviation вҗІ br'6 . Models with log-log links can be fitted using the
Fisher scoring algorithm for GLMs.

6.6.5 Beetle Mortality Example Revisited
For the beetle mortality data ЕҪTable 6.14., the complementary log-log model
has ML estimates вҗЈЛҶ s y39.52 and вҗӨЛҶs 22.01. At dosage x s 1.7, the fitted probability of survival is 1 y вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x. s expГ„yexpwy39.52 q 22.01ЕҪ1.7.x4 s
0.885, whereas at x s 1.8 it is 0.332 and at x s 1.9 it is 5 = 10y5. The probability of survival at dosage x q 0.1 equals the probability at dosage x raised to the power exp ЕҪ22.01 = 0.1. s 9.03. For instance, 0.332 s ЕҪ0.885.9.03.
Table 6.14 shows the fitted values and Figure 6.6 shows the fit. They are close to the observed death counts ЕҪG2 s 3.5, df s 6.. The fit seems adequate. Aranda-Ordaz ЕҪ1981. and Stukel ЕҪ1988. discussed these data further.

6.7 CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION AND EXACT DISTRIBUTIONS*
ML estimators of logistic model parameters work best when the sample size n is large compared to the number of parameters. When n is small or when the number of parameters grows as n does, improved inference results using conditional maximum likelihood. In this section we present this approach and in Section 10.2 apply it with matched caseбҺҗcontrol studies.

6.7.1 Conditional Likelihood

This conditional likelihood approach eliminates nuisance parameters by conditioning on their sufficient statistics. This generalizes FisherвҖҷs method for 2 = 2 tables ЕҪSection 3.5.. The conditional likelihood refers to a conditional distribution defined for potential samples that provide the same information about the nuisance parameters that occurs in the observed sample.
We begin with a general exposition and then discuss special cases. Let yi denote the binary response for subject i, i s 1, . . . , N. ЕҪFor now, each yi refers to a single trial, so ni s 1.. Let xi j be the value of predictor j for that subject, j s 1, . . . , p. The model is

exp yi ЕҪвҗЈ q Гқjs1 p вҗӨj xi j .

P ЕҪ Yi s yi . s

p

,

1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q Гқjs1 вҗӨj xi j .

ЕҪ 6 .14.

where substituting yi s 1 gives the usual expression, such as ЕҪ5.15.. Here, we explicitly separate the intercept from the coefficients of the p predictors. For
N independent observations,

P ЕҪ Y1 s y1 , . . . , YN s yN . s p exp ЕҪГқi yi . вҗЈ . q Гқjps1 ЕҪГқi yi xi j . вҗӨj ЕҪ6.15. ЕҒ i 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q Гқjs1 вҗӨj xi j .

CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION AND EXACT DISTRIBUTIONS

251

From this likelihood function, the sufficient statistic for вҗӨj is Гқi yi xi j, j s 1, . . . , p. The sufficient statistic for вҗЈ is Гқi yi, the total number of successes.
Usually, some parameters refer to effects of primary interest. Others may be there to adjust for relevant effects, but their values are not of special interest. We can eliminate the latter parameters from the likelihood by conditioning on their sufficient statistics. We illustrate by eliminating вҗЈ. ЕҪIn Section 10.2.5 we show that for models for matched caseбҺҗcontrol studies, intercept terms cause difficulties with inference about the primary parameters, so it can be helpful to eliminate them.. Since the sufficient statistic for вҗЈ is Гқi yi, we condition on Гқi yi. Suppose that Гқi yi s t. Denote the conditional reference set of samples having the same value of Гқi yi as observed by
ВҪ 5 SЕҪ t . s ЕҪ y*1 , . . . , yN*. : Гқ yi* s t . i

With Г„ yi4 such that Гқi yi s t, the conditional likelihood function equals

Еҫ / P Y1 s y1 , . . . , YN s yN Гқ yi s t s P ЕҪ Y1 s y1 , . . . , YN s yN .

i

ГқSЕҪt. P ЕҪ Y1 s y1*, . . . , YN s yN*.

exp tвҗЈ q Гқjs1 p ЕҪГқi yi xi j . вҗӨj ЕҒ i 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q Гқjs1 p вҗӨj xi j . s ГқSЕҪt.exp tвҗЈ q Гқjs1 p ЕҪГқi yi*xi j . вҗӨj rЕҒ i 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q Гқjs1 p вҗӨj xi j .

exp

Гқ

p js1

ЕҪГқi

yi

x

i

j

.

вҗӨj

s ГқSЕҪt.exp Гқ js1 p ЕҪГқi yi*xi j . вҗӨj .

This does not depend on вҗЈ. A conditional likelihood is used just like an ordinary likelihood. For the
parameters in it, their conditional ML estimates are the values maximizing it. Calculated using iterative methods, the estimators are asymptotically normal with covariance matrix equal to the negative inverse of the matrix of second partial derivatives of the conditional log likelihood.

6.7.2 Small-Sample Conditional Inference for Logistic Regression
For small samples, inference for a parameter uses the conditional distribution after eliminating all other parameters. With it, one can calculate probabilities such as P-values exactly rather than with crude approximations ЕҪCox 1970..
For instance, suppose that inference focuses on вҗӨp in model ЕҪ6.14.. To eliminate other parameters, we condition on their sufficient statistics Tj s Гқi yi xi j, j s 0, . . . , p y 1 ЕҪwhere xi0 s 1.. With an argument like that

252

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

just shown, one obtains the conditional distribution

P ЕҪ Y1 s y1 , . . . , YN s yN < Tj s tj , j s 0, . . . , p y 1.

exp ЕҪГқi yi xi p . вҗӨp s ГқSЕҪt0 , . . . , tpy1 .exp ЕҪГқi yi*xi p . вҗӨp

s expЕҪ tp вҗӨp . , ГқSЕҪt0 , . . . , tpy1 .expЕҪ tp*вҗӨp .

where
ВҪ 5 SЕҪ t0 , . . . , tpy1 . s ЕҪ y*1 , . . . , yN*. : Гқ yi*xi j s tj , j s 0, . . . , p y 1 . i
This depends only on вҗӨp. Inference for вҗӨp uses the conditional distribution of its sufficient statistic, Tp s Гқi yi xi p, given the others. Let cЕҪt0 , . . . , tpy1 , t. denote the number of data vectors in SЕҪt0, . . . , tpy1 . for which Tp s t. The conditional distribution of Tp is
P ЕҪTp s t < Tj s tj , j s 0, . . . , p y 1. s cЕҪ t0 , . . . , tpy1 , t .expЕҪ tвҗӨp . ,
Гқu cЕҪ t0 , . . . , tpy1 , u.expЕҪ uвҗӨp .
ЕҪ 6 .16.

where the denominator summation refers to the possible values u of Tp. For testing H0: вҗӨp s 0, the conditional distribution simplifies. For Ha:
вҗӨp ) 0 and observed Tp s tobs , the exact conditional P-value is

Гқ P ЕҪTp s t < Tj s tj , j s 0, . . . , p y 1. s , Гқt G tobscЕҪ t0 , . . . , tpy1 ,t .

tGt obs

Гқu cЕҪ t0 , . . . , tpy1 , u.

the proportion of data configurations in the conditional set that have the sufficient statistic for вҗӨp at least as large as observed. Implementing this inference requires calculating Г„cЕҪt0, . . . , tpy1 , u.4. For all but the simplest problems, computations are intensive and require specialized software ЕҪe.g., LogXact of Cytel Software or PROC LOGISTIC in SAS.. In the remainder of this section we consider special cases for small-sample inference.

6.7.3 Small-Sample Conditional Inference for 2 = 2 Contingency Tables

First, consider logistic regression with a single predictor x,

logit P ЕҪ Yi s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi , i s 1, . . . , N,

ЕҪ 6 .17.

when xi takes only two values. The model applies to 2 = 2 tables, where xi s 1 denotes row 1 and xi s 0 denotes row 2. The sufficient statistic for вҗЈ

CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION AND EXACT DISTRIBUTIONS

253

is Гқi yi, which is the first column total. The sufficient statistic for вҗӨ is T s Гқi yi xi, which simplifies to the number of successes in the first row. Equivalently, the sufficient statistics for the model are the numbers of
successes in the two rows. Let s1 and s2 denote these binomial variates. The row totals n1 and n2 are their indices.
To eliminate вҗЈ , we condition on s s s1 q s2 , the first column total. Since N s n1 q n2 is fixed, so then is the other column marginal total. Fixing both
Еҫ / Еҫ / sets of marginal totals yields hypergeometric probabilities for s1 that depend
only on вҗӨ wsee ЕҪ3.20., identifying вҗӘ s expЕҪ вҗӨ .x. In that case the conditional
distribution satisfies ЕҪ6.16. with cЕҪt0 , t. s n1 N y n1 t t and with t 0 y t 0 s s and t s s1. The resulting exact conditional test that вҗӨ s 0 is FisherвҖҷs exact test for 2 = 2 tables ЕҪSection 3.5.1..

6.7.4 Small-Sample Conditional Inference for Linear Logit Model The linear logit model, logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi, applies to I = 2 tables with ordered rows. We discussed this model in Section 5.3.4. For it, the data Г„ yi4 are I independent Г„bin ЕҪ ni, вҗІi.4 counts, with fixed row totals Г„ni4. Conditioning on s s Гқ yi and hence the column totals yields a conditional likelihood free of вҗЈ. Exact inference about вҗӨ uses its sufficient statistic, T s Гқ xi yi. From ЕҪ6.16. its distribution has the form

Еҫ / P T s t Гқ yi s s; вҗӨ s

cЕҪ s, t. eвҗӨt
вҗӨu .

i

ГқucЕҪ s, u. e

ЕҪ 6 .18.

Here, cЕҪ s, u. equals the sum of marginal totals that have T s u.

ЕҒi Еҫ yi ni /

for all tables with the given

When вҗӨ s 0, the cell counts have the multiple hypergeometric distribution ЕҪ3.19.. To test this, ordering the tables with the given margins by T is equivalent to ordering them by the CochranбҺҗArmitage statistic ЕҪSection 5.3.5.. Thus, this test for the linear logit model is an exact trend test.

In Section 5.3.5 we applied the CochranбҺҗArmitage test to Table 5.3 on

maternal alcohol consumption and infant malformation. Even though n s

32,573, the table is highly unbalanced, with both very small and very large

counts. It is safer to use small-sample methods. For the exact conditional

trend test with the same scores, the one-sided P-value for Ha: вҗӨ ) 0 is

0.0168. The two-sided P-value is 0.0172, reflecting asymmetry of the condi-

tional distribution, given the marginal counts. This is not much different from

the two-sided P-value of 0.010 obtained with the large-sample CochranбҺҗ

Armitage test.

254

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

6.7.5 Small-Sample Tests of Conditional Independence in 2 = 2 = K Tables
For 2 = 2 = K tables Г„ ni jk4, the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel test uses Гқk n11 k. For logit model ЕҪ6.4., this is the sufficient statistic for вҗӨ, the effect of X. To conduct a small-sample test of вҗӨ s 0, one needs to eliminate the other model parameters. Constructing the likelihood reveals that the sufficient statistics for Г„ вҗӨ Zk 4 are the column marginal totals Г„nqjk4 in each partial table. When X and Z are predictors, it is natural to treat the numbers of trials Г„niqk 4 at each combination of XZ values as fixed. Thus, exact inference about вҗӨ conditions on the row and column totals in each stratum.
Conditional on the strata margins, an exact test uses Гқk n11 k. Hypergeometric probabilities occur in each partial table for the independent null distributions of Г„n11 k , k s 1, . . . , K 4. The product of the K mass functions gives the null joint distribution of Г„n11 k , k s 1, . . . , K 4. wThis is ЕҪ6.19. below, setting вҗӘ s 1.x This determines the null distribution of Гқk n11 k. For Ha: вҗӨ ) 0, the P-value is the null probability that Гқk n11 k is at least as large as observed, for the fixed strata marginal totals. Mehta et al. ЕҪ1985. presented a fast algorithm. The test simplifies to FisherвҖҷs exact test when K s 1.

6.7.6 Promotion Discrimination Example
Table 6.15 refers to U.S. government computer specialists of similar seniority considered for promotion. The table cross-classifies promotion decision by employeeвҖҷs race, considered for three separate months. We test conditional independence of promotion decision and race, or H0: вҗӨ s 0, in model ЕҪ6.4.. The table contains several small counts. The overall sample size is not small ЕҪ n s 74., but one marginal count ЕҪcollapsing over month of decision. equals zero, so we might be wary of using the CMH test.
For Ha: вҗӨ - 0 ЕҪi.e., odds ratio - 1., the probability of promotion was lower for black employees than for white employees. For the margins of the partial tables in Table 6.15, n111 can range between 0 and 4, n112 can range between 0 and 4, and n113 can range between 0 and 2. The total Гқk n11 k can range between 0 and 10. The sample data are the most extreme possible

TABLE 6.15 Promotion Decisions by Race and by Month

Race

July Promotions

Yes

No

August Promotions

Yes

No

September Promotions

Yes

No

Black

0

7

0

7

0

8

White

4

16

4

13

2

13

Source: J. Gastwirth, Statistical Reasoning in Law and Public Policy ЕҪSan Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1988., p. 266.

CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION AND EXACT DISTRIBUTIONS

255

result in each case. The observed Гқk n11 k s 0, and the P-value is the null probability of this outcome. Software provides P s 0.026. A two-sided P-
value, based on summing the probabilities of all tables no more likely than
the observed table, equals 0.056.

6.7.7 Exact Conditional Estimation and Comparison of Odds Ratios
For model ЕҪ6.4. of homogeneous association in 2 = 2 = K tables, the ordinary ML estimator of the odds ratio вҗӘ s expЕҪ вҗӨ . behaves poorly for sparse-data asymptotics. The conditional ML estimator maximizes the conditional likelihood function after reducing the parameter space by conditioning on sufficient statistics for the other parameters ЕҪAndersen 1970; Birch 1964b..
For cell counts Г„ ni jk4, given Г„ niqk , nqjk4 for all k, the conditional probability mass function that ЕҪ n111 s t1, . . . , n11 K s tK . is the product of the functions ЕҪ3.20. from the separate strata, or

n1qk

Еҫ / Еҫ / ЕҒ P ЕҪ n11k s tk < n1qk , nq1 k , nqqk ;вҗӘ . s ЕҒ Еҫ / Еҫ / k k Гқu

tk
n1qk u

nqqk y n1qk вҗӘ tk nq1 k y tk . nqqk y n1qk вҗӘ u nq1 k y u

ЕҪ 6 .19.

The conditional ML estimator вҗӘЛҶ maximizes ЕҪ6.19.. Like the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimator вҗӘЛҶMH , it has good properties for both standard and sparse-data
asymptotic cases ЕҪAndersen 1970; Breslow 1981., since the number of param-
eters does not change as K does. It can be slightly more efficient than вҗӘЛҶMH ,
except when вҗӘ s 1.0, where they are equally efficient, or for matched pairs, where they are identical ЕҪBreslow 1981..
The conditional distribution ЕҪ6.19. propagates one for Гқk n11 k , which is used to test H0: вҗӘ s вҗӘ0 for an arbitrary value. Then, a 95% confidence interval for вҗӘ consists of all вҗӘ0 for which the P-value exceeds 0.05. Such an interval is guaranteed to have at least the nominal coverage probability ЕҪGart 1970; Kim and Agresti 1995; Mehta et al. 1985.. This extends the interval for a single 2 = 2 table ЕҪSection 3.6.1.. For the promotion discrimination case ЕҪTable 6.15., Гқk n11 k s 0, so the lower bound of any confidence interval for вҗӘ should be 0. For the generalization to several strata of CornfieldвҖҷs tail-method interval, StatXact reports a 95% confidence interval of ЕҪ0, 1.01..
Zelen ЕҪ1971. presented a small-sample test of homogeneity of the odds ratios. See Agresti ЕҪ1992. for discussion of this and other small-sample
methods for contingency tables.

256

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

TABLE 6.16 Example for Exact Conditional Logistic Regression

Cephalexin a

Agea

Length of Stay a

Cases of Diarrhea

Sample Size

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

385

5

233

3

789

47

1081

5

5

aSee the text for an explanation of 0 and 1.

Source: Based on study by E. Jaffe and V. Chang, Cornell Medical Center, reported in the Manual for LogXact ЕҪCambridge, MA: CYTEL Software, 1999., p. 259.

6.7.8 Diarrhea Example
The final example deals with a larger number of variables. Table 6.16 refers to 2493 patients having stays in a hospital. The response is whether they suffered an acute form of diarrhea during their stay. The three predictors are age ЕҪ1 for over 50 years old, 0 for under 50., length of stay in hospital ЕҪ1 for more than 1 week, 0 for less than 1 week., and exposure to an antibiotic called Cephalexin ЕҪ1 for yes, 0 for no.. We discuss estimation of the effect of Cephalexin, controlling for age and length of stay, using a model containing only main-effect terms.
The sample size is large, yet relatively few cases of acute diarrhea occurred. Moreover, all subjects having exposure to Cephalexin were also diarrhea cases. Such boundary outcomes in which none or all responses fall in one category cause infinite ML estimates of some model parameters. An ML estimate of Пұ for the Cephalexin effect means that the likelihood function increases continually as the parameter estimate for Cephalexin increases indefinitely.
To study the Cephalexin effect, we use an exact distribution, conditioning on sufficient statistics for the other predictors. Although the estimate of the log-odds-ratio parameter for the effect of Cephalexin is infinite, it is possible to construct a confidence interval by inverting the family of tests for the parameter, using the conditional distribution. Doing this, a 95% confidence interval is ЕҪ19, Пұ. for the odds ratio. Assuming that the main-effects model is valid, Cephalexin appears to have a strong effect. Similarly, P - 0.0001 for testing that the log odds ratio equals zero.
Results must be qualified somewhat because no Cephalexin cases occurred at the first three combinations of levels of age and length of stay. In fact, the first three rows of Table 6.16 make no contribution to the analysis ЕҪProblem 6.18.. The data actually provide evidence about the effect of Cephalexin only for older subjects having a long stay.

NOTES

257

6.7.9 Complications from Discreteness
Like FisherвҖҷs exact test, exact conditional inference for contingency tables is conservative because of discreteness. This is especially true when n is small or the data are unbalanced, with most observations falling in a single column or row. Using mid-P-values or P-values based on a finer partitioning of the sample space ЕҪNote 3.9. in tests and related confidence intervals reduces conservativeness. For the promotion discrimination data ЕҪTable 6.15., we reported a 95% confidence interval for the common odds ratio of ЕҪ0, 1.01.. Inverting exact tests of H0: вҗӘ s вҗӘ0 with the mid-P-value yields the interval ЕҪ0, 0.78.. However, this approach cannot guarantee that the actual coverage probability is bounded below by 0.95.
A particular problem occurs when no other set of Г„ yi*4 values has the same value of a given sufficient statistic Гқi yi xi j as the observed data. In that case the conditional distribution of the sufficient statistic for the parameter of interest is degenerate. The P-value for the exact test then equals 1.0. This commonly happens when at least one explanatory variable x j whose effect is conditioned out for the inference is continuous, with unequally spaced observed values.
Finally, a limitation of the conditional approach is requiring sufficient statistics for the nuisance parameters. This happens only with GLMs that use the canonical link. Thus, for instance, the conditional approach works for logit models but not probit models.

NOTES
Section 6.1: Strategies in Model Selection
6.1. A Bayesian argument motivates the Bayesian information criterion BIC s wG2 y ЕҪlog n.ЕҪdf.x, an alternative to AIC. It takes sample size into account. Compared to AIC, BIC gravitates less quickly toward more complex models as n increases. For details and critiques, see Raftery ЕҪ1986. and the February 1999 issue of Sociological Methods and Research.
6.2. Tree-structured methods such as CART are alternatives to logistic regression that formalize a decision process using a sequential set of questions that branch in different directions depending on a subjectвҖҷs responses. An example is deciding whether a subject with chest pains may be suffering a heart attack. Zhang et al. ЕҪ1998. surveyed such methods.
Section 6.2: Logistic Regression Diagnostics
6.3. For logistic regression diagnostics, see Copas ЕҪ1988., Fowlkes ЕҪ1987., Hosmer and Lemeshow ЕҪ2000, Chap. 5., Johnson ЕҪ1985., Landwehr et al. ЕҪ1984., and Pregibon ЕҪ1981.. Separate diagnostics are useful for checking the adequacy of each component of a GLM ЕҪMcCullagh and Nelder 1989, Chap. 12.. For a family gЕҪвҗ®; вҗҘ . of link functions indexed

258

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

by parameter вҗҘ , Pregibon ЕҪ1980. showed how to estimate вҗҘ giving the link with best fit and how to check the adequacy of a given link gЕҪвҗ®; вҗҘ0 .. 6.4. Amemiya ЕҪ1981., Efron ЕҪ1978., Maddala ЕҪ1983., and Zheng and Agresti ЕҪ2000. and references therein reviewed R2 measures for binary regression. Hosmer and Lemeshow ЕҪ2000, Sec. 5.2.3. discussed classification tables and their limitations. Pepe ЕҪ2000. and
references therein surveyed ROC methodology.

Section 6.3: Inference about Conditional Associations in 2 = 2 = K Tables
6.5. Analogs of вҗӘЛҶMH summarize differences of proportions or relative risks from several
strata ЕҪGreenland and Robins 1985.. Breslow and Day ЕҪ1980, p. 142. proposed an alternative large-sample test of homogeneity of odds ratios. In each partial table let
Г„вҗ®ЛҶi jk4 have the same marginals as the data observed, yet have odds ratio equal to вҗӘЛҶMH . Their test statistic has the Pearson form comparing Г„ni jk4 to Г„вҗ®ЛҶi jk4. Tarone ЕҪ1985. showed that because of the inefficiency of вҗӘЛҶMH one must adjust the BreslowбҺҗDay
statistic for it to have a limiting chi-squared null distribution with df s K y 1. This adjustment is usually minor. Jones et al. ЕҪ1989. reviewed and compared several tests of homogeneity in sparse and nonsparse settings. Other work on comparing odds ratios and estimating a common value include Breslow and Day ЕҪ1980, Sec. 4.4., Donner and Hauck ЕҪ1986., Gart ЕҪ1970., and Liang and Self ЕҪ1985.. For modeling the odds ratio, see Breslow ЕҪ1976., Breslow and Day ЕҪ1980, Sec. 7.5., and Prentice ЕҪ1976a.. Breslow emphasized retrospective studies, in which the conditional approach is natural since the outcome totals are fixed.

Section 6.5: Sample Size and Power Considerations
6.6. For sample-size determination for comparing proportions, Fleiss ЕҪ1981, Sec. 3.2. provided tables. See Lachin ЕҪ1977. for the I = J case. Chapman and Meng ЕҪ1966., Drost et al. ЕҪ1989., Haberman ЕҪ1974a, pp. 109бҺҗ112., Harkness and Katz ЕҪ1964., Mitra ЕҪ1958., and Patnaik ЕҪ1949. derived theory for asymptotic nonnull behavior of chi-squared statistics; see also Section 14.3.5. OвҖҳBrienвҖҷs ЕҪ1986. simulation results suggested that the noncentral chi-squared approximation for G2 holds well for a wide range of powers. Read and Cressie ЕҪ1988, pp. 147бҺҗ148. listed other articles that studied the nonnull behavior of X 2 and G2.

Section 6.6: Probit and Complementary Log-Log Models
6.7. Finney ЕҪ1971. is the standard reference on probit modeling. Chambers and Cox ЕҪ1967. showed that it is difficult to distinguish between probit and logit models unless n is extremely large. Ashford and Sowden ЕҪ1970. generalized the probit model for multivariate binary responses; see also Lesaffre and Molenberghs ЕҪ1991. and Ochi and Prentice ЕҪ1984.. Wedderburn ЕҪ1976. showed that the log likelihood is concave for probit and complementary log-log links.

Section 6.7: Conditional Logistic Regression
6.8. For details about conditional logistic regression, see Section 10.2, Breslow and Day ЕҪ1980, Chap. 7., Cox ЕҪ1970., and Hosmer and Lemeshow ЕҪ2000, Chap. 5.. Liang ЕҪ1984. showed that conditional ML estimators and conditional score tests are asymptotically equivalent to their unconditional counterparts under sampling from exponential families. For exact inference using the conditional likelihood, see Hirji et al. ЕҪ1987., Mehta and Patel ЕҪ1995., and the LogXact manual ЕҪCytel Software.. Mehta et al. ЕҪ2000. discussed Monte Carlo approximations.

PROBLEMS

259

PROBLEMS

Applications
6.1 For the horseshoe crab data, fit a model using weight and width as predictors. Conduct ЕҪa. a likelihood-ratio test of H0: вҗӨ1 s вҗӨ2 s 0, and ЕҪb. separate tests for the partial effects. Why does neither test in part ЕҪb. show evidence of an effect when the test in part ЕҪa. shows strong evidence?

6.2 Refer to the data for Problem 8.13. Treating opinion about premarital sex as the response variable, use backward elimination to select a model. Interpret.
6.3 Refer to Table 6.4. Fit the stage 3 model denoted there by ЕҪ E*P q G.. Use parameter estimates to interpret the G effect and the dependence of the E effect on P.

6.4 Discern the reasons that SimpsonвҖҷs paradox occurs for Table 6.7.

6.5 Refer to Problem 2.12.
a. Fit the model with G and D main effects. Using it, estimate the AG conditional odds ratio. Compare to the marginal odds ratio, and explain why they are so different. Test its goodness of fit.
b. Fit the model of no G effect, given the department. Use X 2 to test fit. Obtain residuals, and interpret the lack of fit. ЕҪEach department has a single nonredundant standardized Pearson residual. They satisfy Гқis1 6 ri2 s X 2, their squares giving six df s 1 components..
c. Fit the two models excluding department A. Again consider lack of fit, and interpret.

6.6 Conduct a residual analysis for the independence model with Table 6.11. What type of lack of fit is indicated?

6.7 Table 6.17, refers to the effectiveness of immediately injected or

1

1 2

-hour-delayed

penicillin

in

protecting

rabbits

against

lethal

injection

with вҗӨ-hemolytic streptococci.

a. Let X s delay, Y s whether cured, and Z s penicillin level. Fit

the logit model ЕҪ6.4.. Argue that the pattern of 0 cell counts

suggests

that

ЕҪwith

no

intercept.

вҗӨЛҶZ
1

s yПұ

and

вҗӨЛҶZ
5

s Пұ.

What

does

your software report?

b. Using the logit model, conduct the likelihood-ratio test of XY conditional independence. Interpret.

260

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

TABLE 6.17 Data for Problem 6.7

Penicillin Level

Delay

Response

Cured

Died

81 None 0 6 1 21 h 0 5

41 None 3 3 1 21 h 0 6

21 None 6 0 1 21 h 2 4

1

None

5

1

1 21 h 6 0

4

None

2

0

1 21 h 5 0

Source: Reprinted with permission from Mantel ЕҪ1963..

c. Test XY conditional independence using the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗ Haenszel test. Interpret.
d. Estimate the XY conditional odds ratio using ЕҪi. ML with the logit model, and ЕҪii. the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimate. Interpret.
e. The small cell counts make large-sample analyses questionnable. Conduct small-sample inference, and interpret.
6.8 Refer to Table 2.6. Use the CMH statistic to test independence of death penalty verdict and victimвҖҷs race, controlling for defendantвҖҷs race. Show another test of this hypothesis, and compare results.
6.9 Treatments A and B were compared on a binary response for 40 pairs of subjects matched on relevant covariates. For each pair, treatments were assigned to the subjects randomly. Twenty pairs of subjects made the same response for each treatment. Six pairs had a success for the subject receiving A and a failure for the subject receiving B, whereas the other 14 pairs had a success for B and a failure for A. Use the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel procedure to test independence of response and treatment. ЕҪIn Section 10.1 we present an equivalent test, McNemarвҖҷs test..
6.10 Refer to Section 6.5.1. Suppose that вҗІ 1 s 0.7 and вҗІ 2 s 0.6. What sample size is needed for the test to have approximate power 0.80, when вҗЈ s 0.05, for ЕҪa. Ha: вҗІ 1 / вҗІ 2 , and ЕҪb. Ha: вҗІ 1 ) вҗІ 2?

PROBLEMS

261

6.11 Refer to Section 6.5.1. Suppose that вҗІ 1 s 0.63 and вҗІ 2 s 0.57. When treatment sample sizes are equal, explain why the joint probabilities in the 2 = 2 table are 0.315 and 0.185 in the row for treatment A and
0.285 and 0.215 in the row for treatment B. For the model of indepen-
dence, explain why the fitted joint probabilities are 0.30 for success and 0.20 for failure, in each row. Show that X 2 has noncentrality parameter 0.00375n and df s 1. For n s 200 and вҗЈ s 0.05, find the
power.

6.12 In an experiment designed to compare two treatments on a three-category response, a researcher expects the conditional distributions to be approximately ЕҪ0.2, 0.2, 0.6. and ЕҪ0.3, 0.3, 0.4.. a. With вҗЈ s 0.05, find the approximate power using ЕҪi. X 2, and ЕҪii. G2 to compare the distributions with 100 observations for each treatment. Compare results.
b. What sample size is needed for each treatment for the tests in part ЕҪa. to have approximate power 0.90?

6.13 The horseshoe crab width values in Table 4.3 have x s 26.3 and sx s 2.1. If the true relationship were similar to the fitted equation in Section 5.1.3, about how large a sample yields PЕҪtype II error. s 0.10, with вҗЈ s 0.05, for testing H0: вҗӨ s 0 against Ha: вҗӨ ) 0?
6.14 Refer to Problem 5.1. Table 6.18 shows output for fitting a probit model. Interpret the parameter estimates ЕҪa. using characteristics of the normal cdf response curve, ЕҪb. finding the estimated rate of change in the probability of remission where it equals 0.5, and ЕҪc. finding the difference between the estimated probabilities of remission at the upper and lower quartiles of the labeling index, 14 and 28.

TABLE 6.18 Data for Problem 6.14

Parameter Intercept LI

Estimate y2.3178
0.0878

Standard Error 0.7795 0.0328

Likelihood Ratio 95%

Confidence Limits

y4.0114 y0.9084

0.0275

0.1575

ChiSquare
8.84 7.19

Pr ) ChiSq 0.0029 0.0073

6.15 Use probit models to describe the effects of width and color on the probability of a satellite for Table 4.3. Interpret.
6.16 Refer to Table 6.14. Fit the model having log-log link rather than complementary log-log. Test the fit. Why does it fit so poorly?

262

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

6.17 For the linear logit model with Table 3.9 and scores ЕҪ0, 15, 30., conduct the exact test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 and find a point and interval estimate of вҗӨ using the conditional likelihood. Interpret.

6.18 Refer to Table 6.16. Apply conditional logistic regression to the model discussed in Section 6.7.8.
a. Obtain an exact P-value for testing no C effect against the alternative of a positive effect. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the conditional CD odds ratio.
b. Construct the partial tables relating C to D for the combinations of levels of ЕҪ A, L.. Note that three tables have no data when C s 1. For the sole partial table having data at both C levels, find a 95% exact confidence interval for the odds ratio and find an exact one-sided P-value. Compare to results using the entire data set. Comment about the contribution to inference of tables having only a single positive row total or a single positive column total.
c. Obtain the ordinary ML fit of the logistic regression model. To investigate the sensitivity of the estimated C effect, find the change in the estimate and SE after adding one observation to the data set, a case with no diarrhea when ЕҪC, A, L. s ЕҪ1, 1, 1..

6.19 Consider Table 6.19, from a study of nonmetastatic osteosarcoma ЕҪA. M. Goorin, J. Clin Oncol. 5: 1178бҺҗ1184, 1987, and the manual for LogXact.. The response is whether the subject achieved a three-year disease-free interval.
a. Show that each predictor has a significant effect when used individually without the others.
b. Try to fit a main-effects logistic regression model containing all three predictors. Explain why the ML estimate for the effect of lymphocytic infiltration is infinite.

TABLE 6.19 Data for Problem 6.19

Lymphocytic Infiltration

Gender

Osteoblastic Pathology

Disease-Free

Yes

No

High Low

Female

No

Yes

Male

No

Yes

Female

No

Yes

Male

No

Yes

3

0

2

0

4

0

1

0

5

0

3

2

5

4

6

11

Source: LogXact 4 for Windows ЕҪCambridge, MA: CYTEL Software, 1999..

PROBLEMS

263

c. Using conditional logistic regression, ЕҪi. conduct an exact test for the effect of lymphocytic infiltration, controlling for the other variables; and ЕҪii. find a 95% confidence interval for the effect. Interpret results.

6.20 Use the methods discussed in this chapter to select a model for Table 5.5.

6.21 Logistic regression is applied increasingly to large financial databases, such as for credit scoring to model the influence of predictors on whether a consumer is creditworthy. The data archive found under the index at www. stat.uni-muenchen.de contains such a data set that includes 20 covariates for 1000 observations. Build a model for creditworthiness using the predictors running account, duration of credit, payment of previous credits, intended use, gender, and marital status.

Theory and Methods

6.22 For a sequence of s nested models M1, . . . , Ms, model Ms is the most complex. Let вҗҜ denote the difference in residual df between M1 and

Ms. a. Explain why for j - k, G2ЕҪ Mj < Mk . F G2ЕҪ Mj < Ms..

b. Assume model Mj, so that Mk also holds when k ) j. For all k ) j,

as

n в„ў Пұ,

PwG

2

ЕҪ

Mj

<

Mk

.

)

2
вҗ№вҗҜ

ЕҪвҗЈ.x

F

вҗЈ

.

Explain

why.

c. Gabriel ЕҪ1966. suggested a simultaneous testing procedure in which,

for each pair of models, the critical value for differences between G2 values is вҗ№вҗҜ2ЕҪвҗЈ.. The final model accepted must be more

complex than any model rejected in a pairwise comparison. Since part ЕҪb. is true for all j - k, argue that GabrielвҖҷs procedure has type

I error probability no greater than вҗЈ.

6.23 Prove that the Pearson residuals for the linear logit model applied to a I = 2 contingency table satisfy X 2 s Гқis1 I ei2. Note that this holds for a binomial GLM with any link.
6.24 Refer to logit model ЕҪ6.4. for a 2 = 2 = K contingency table Г„ni jk4. a. Using dummy variables, write the log-likelihood function. Identify the sufficient statistics for the various parameters. Explain how to conduct exact conditional inference about the effect of X, controlling for Z. b. Using a basic result for testing in exponential families, explain why uniformly most powerful unbiased tests of conditional XY independence are based on Гқk n11 k ЕҪBirch 1964b; Lehmann 1986, Sec. 4.8..

264

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

6.25 Suppose that Г„вҗІi jk4 in a 2 = 2 = 2 table are, by row, ЕҪ0.15, 0.10 r 0.10, 0.15. when Z s 1 and ЕҪ0.10, 0.15 r 0.15, 0.10. when Z s 2. For testing conditional XY independence with logit models having Y as a response, explain why the likelihood-ratio test comparing models X q Z and Z is not consistent but the likelihood-ratio test of fit of the XY conditional independence model is.

6.26 Refer to Section 6.4.1. When Y is NЕҪвҗ®i,вҗҙ 2 ., consider the comparison of ЕҪвҗ®1, . . . , вҗ®I . based on independent samples at the I categories of X. When approximately вҗ®i s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi, explain why the t or F test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 is more powerful than the one-way ANOVA F test. Describe a pattern for Г„вҗ®i4 for which the ANOVA test would be more powerful.

6.27 For a multinomial distribution, let вҗҘ s Гқi biвҗІi, and suppose that вҗІi s fiЕҪвҗӘ . ) 0, i s 1, . . . , I. For sample proportions Г„ pi4, let S s Гқi bi pi.
Let T s Гқi biвҗІЛҶi, where вҗІЛҶi s fiЕҪвҗӘЛҶ., for the ML estimator вҗӘЛҶ of вҗӘ.
a. Show that var ЕҪS. s wГқi bi2вҗІ i y ЕҪГқi biвҗІ i.2 xrn.
b. Using the delta method, show var ЕҪT . f wvar ЕҪвҗӘЛҶ.xwГқi bi fiXЕҪвҗӘ .x2.
c. By computing the information for LЕҪвҗӘ . s Гқi ni logw fiЕҪвҗӘ .x, show that
var ЕҪвҗӘЛҶ. is approximately w nГқiЕҪ fiXЕҪвҗӘ ..2rfiЕҪвҗӘ .xy1.
d. Asymptotically, show that varw'n ЕҪT y вҗҘ .x F varw'n ЕҪS y вҗҘ .x. w Hint:
Show that varЕҪT .rvarЕҪS. is a squared correlation between two

random variables, where with probability вҗІi the first equals bi and

the second equals

f

X i

ЕҪ

вҗӘ

.rf

i

ЕҪ

вҗӘ

..

x

6.28 A threshold model can also motivate the probit model. For it, there is an unobserved continuous response Y * such that the observed yi s 0 if yi* F вҗ¶ and yi s 1 if yi* ) вҗ¶ . Suppose that yi* s вҗ®i q в‘Җi, where вҗ®i s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi and where Г„в‘Җi4 are independent from a NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . distribution. For identifiability one can set вҗҙ s 1 and the threshold вҗ¶ s 0. Show that the probit model holds and explain why вҗӨ represents the expected number of standard deviation change in Y * for a 1-unit increase in x.

6.29 Consider the choice between two options, such as two product brands. Let U0 denote the utility of outcome y s 0 and U1 the utility of y s 1. For y s 0 and 1, suppose that Uy s вҗЈ y q вҗӨy x q в‘Җy, using a scale such that в‘Җy has some standardized distribution. A subject selects y s 1 if U1 ) U0 for that subject. a. If в‘Җ0 and в‘Җ1 are independent NЕҪ0, 1. random variables, show that PЕҪY s 1. satisfies the probit model.
b. If в‘Җy are independent extreme-value random variables, with cdf FЕҪв‘Җ . s exp wyexp ЕҪyв‘Җ .x, show that PЕҪY s 1. satisfies the logistic regression model ЕҪMaddala 1983, p. 60; McFadden 1974..

PROBLEMS

265

6.30 Consider model ЕҪ6.12. with complementary log-log link. a. Find x at which вҗІ ЕҪ x. s 21 . b. Show the greatest rate of change of вҗІ ЕҪ x. occurs at x s yвҗЈrвҗӨ. What does вҗІ ЕҪ x. equal at that point? Give the corresponding result
for the model with log-log link, and compare to the logit and probit
models.

6.31 Suppose that log-log model ЕҪ6.13. holds. Explain how to interpret вҗӨ.

6.32 Let yi, i s 1, . . . , n, denote n independent binary random variables. a. Derive the log likelihood for the probit model вҢҪy1wвҗІ ЕҪx i.x s Гқj вҗӨj xi j. b. Show that the likelihood equations for the logistic and probit regression models are

Гқ ЕҪ yi y вҗІЛҶi . zi xi j s 0,
i

j s 0, . . . , p,

where zi s 1 for the logistic case and zi s вҗҫЕҪГқj вҗӨЛҶj xi j.rвҗІЛҶiЕҪ1 y вҗІЛҶi.
for the probit case. ЕҪWhen the link is not canonical, there is no reduction of the data in sufficient statistics..

6.33 Sometimes, sample proportions are continuous rather than of the binomial form ЕҪnumber of successes.rЕҪnumber of trials.. Each observation is any real number between 0 and 1, such as the proportion of a tooth surface that is covered with plaque. For independent responses Г„ yi4, Aitchison and Shen ЕҪ1980. and Bartlett ЕҪ1937. modeled logitЕҪYi. ; NЕҪ вҗӨi, вҗҙ 2 .. Then Yi itself is said to have a logistic-normal distribution. a. Expressing a NЕҪ вҗӨ, вҗҙ 2 . variate as вҗӨ q вҗҙ Z, where Z is standard normal, show that Yi s expЕҪ вҗӨi q вҗҙ Z.rw1 q exp ЕҪ вҗӨi q вҗҙ Z.x. b. Show that for small вҗҙ ,

e вҗӨi

e вҗӨi

1

e вҗӨiЕҪ1 y e вҗӨi.

Yi s 1 q e вҗӨ q i 1 q e вҗӨi 1 q e вҗӨi вҗҙ Z q 2ЕҪ 1 q e вҗӨi . 3 вҗҙ 2Z 2 q РёРёРё .

c. Letting вҗ®i s e вҗӨirЕҪ1 q e вҗӨi., when вҗҙ is close to 0 show that
EЕҪ Yi . f вҗ®i , varЕҪ Yi . f вҗ®i ЕҪ1 y вҗ®i . 2 вҗҙ 2 .
d. For independent continuous proportions Г„ yi4, let вҗ®i s EЕҪYi.. For a GLM, it is sensible to use an inverse cdf link for вҗ®i, but it is unclear how to choose a distribution for Yi. The approximate moments for the logistic-normal motivate a quasi-likelihood approach ЕҪWedderburn 1974. with variance function В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫw вҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i.x2 for un-

266

BUILDING AND APPLYING LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS

known вҗҫ. Explain why this provides similar results as fitting a normal regression model to the sample logits assuming constant variance. ЕҪThe QL approach has the advantage of not requiring adjustment of 0 or 1 observations, for which sample logits donвҖҷt exist.. e. Wedderburn ЕҪ1974. gave an example with response the proportion of a leaf showing a type of blotch. Envision an approximation of binomial form based on cutting each leaf into a large number of small regions of the same size and observing for each region whether it is mostly covered with blotch. Explain why this suggests that В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫвҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i.. What violation of the binomial assumptions might make this questionnable? wThe parametric family of beta distributions has variance function of this form ЕҪsee Section
13.3.1.. Barndorff-Nielsen and JoЦҖ rgensen ЕҪ1991. proposed a distri-
bution having В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫw вҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i.x3; see also Cox ЕҪ1996..x
6.34 For independent binomial sampling, construct the log likelihood and identify the sufficient statistics to be conditioned out to perform exact inference about вҗӨ in model ЕҪ6.4..
6.35 Let вҗІЛҶ ЕҪy. s ЕҪвҗІЛҶ ЕҪy1., . . . , вҗІЛҶ ЕҪyn.., where вҗІЛҶ ЕҪyi . denotes the estimate of
EЕҪYi. for binary observation i after fitting the model without that observation. Cross-validation declares a model to have good predictive
power if corr ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ ЕҪy., y. is high. Consider the model logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ for all i. Show that вҗІЛҶi s y and hence вҗІЛҶ ЕҪyi . s w nrЕҪ n y 1.xw y y ЕҪ1rn. yi x, and hence corr ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ ЕҪy., y. s y1 regardless of how well the model fits. Thus,
cross-validation can be misleading with binary data ЕҪZheng and Agresti 2000..

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 7
Logit Models for Multinomial Responses

In Chapters 5 and 6 we discussed modeling binary response variables with binomial GLMs. Multicategory responses use multinomial GLMs. In this chapter we generalize logistic regression for multinomial ЕҪnominal and ordinal. response variables.
In Section 7.1 we present a model for nominal responses that uses a separate binary logit model for each pair of response categories. In Section 7.2 we present a model for ordinal responses that uses logits of cumulative response probabilities. In Section 7.3 we use other link functions for those cumulative probabilities. Section 7.4 covers alternative ordinal-response models.
In Section 7.5 we discuss tests of conditional independence with multinomial responses using models and using generalizations of the CochranбҺҗ MantelбҺҗHaenszel statistic. In the final section we introduce a multinomial logit model for discrete-choice modeling of a subjectвҖҷs choice from one of several options when values of predictors may depend on the option.

7.1 NOMINAL RESPONSES: BASELINE-CATEGORY LOGIT MODELS

Еҫ / Let Y be a categorical response with J categories. Multicategory ЕҪalso called
polytomous. logit models for nominal response variables simultaneously de-

scribe log odds for all

J 2

pairs of categories. Given a certain choice of J y 1

of these, the rest are redundant.

7.1.1 Baseline-Category Logits
Let вҗІjЕҪx. s PЕҪY s j < x. at a fixed setting x for explanatory variables, with ГқjвҗІjЕҪx. s 1. For observations at that setting, we treat the counts at the J categories of Y as multinomial with probabilities Г„вҗІ 1ЕҪx., . . . , вҗІJ ЕҪx.4.
267

268

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

Logit models pair each response category with a baseline category, often the last one or the most common one. The model

вҗІ j ЕҪ x.

X

log

s вҗЈj q вҗӨjx,

вҗІJ ЕҪx.

j s 1, . . . , J y 1,

ЕҪ 7 .1.

simultaneously describes the effects of x on these J y 1 logits. The effects vary according to the response paired with the baseline. These J y 1 equations determine parameters for logits with other pairs of response categories, since

log s вҗІaЕҪx. log y вҗІaЕҪx. log вҗІ bЕҪx. .

вҗІ b ЕҪ x.

вҗІJ ЕҪx.

вҗІJ ЕҪx.

With categorical predictors, X 2 and G2 goodness-of-fit statistics provide a model check when data are not sparse. When an explanatory variable is continuous or the data are sparse, such statistics are still valid for comparing nested models differing by relatively few terms ЕҪHaberman 1974a, pp. 372бҺҗ373; 1977a..

7.1.2 Alligator Food Choice Example
Table 7.1 is from a study of factors influencing the primary food choice of alligators. It used 219 alligators captured in four Florida lakes. The nominal response variable is the primary food type, in volume, found in an alligatorвҖҷs stomach. This had five categories: fish, invertebrate, reptile, bird, other. The invertebrates included apple snails, aquatic insects, and crayfish. The reptiles were primarily turtles, although one stomach contained the tags of 23 baby alligators released in the lake the previous year! The вҖҳвҖҳotherвҖҷвҖҷ category consisted of amphibian, mammal, plant material, stones or other debris, or no food or dominant type. Table 7.1 also classifies the alligators according to L s lake of capture ЕҪHancock, Oklawaha, Trafford, George., G s gender ЕҪmale, female., and S s size ЕҪF 2.3 meters long, ) 2.3 meters long..
Baseline-category logit models can investigate the effects of L, G, and S on primary food type. Table 7.2 contains fit statistics for several models. We denote a model by its predictors: for instance, ЕҪ L q S. having additive lake and size effects and ЕҪ . having no predictors. The data are sparse, 219 observations scattered among 80 cells. Thus, G2 is more reliable for comparing models than for testing fit. The statistics G2wЕҪ . < ЕҪG.x s 2.1 and G2 s wЕҪ L q S. < ЕҪG q L q S.x s 2.2, each based on df s 4, suggest simplifying by collapsing the table over gender. ЕҪOther analyses, not presented here, show that adding interaction terms including G do not improve the fit significantly.. The G2 and X 2 values for the collapsed table indicate that both L and S have effects. Table 7.3 exhibits fitted values for model ЕҪ L q S. for the

NOMINAL RESPONSES: BASELINE-CATEGORY LOGIT MODELS

269

TABLE 7.1 Primary Food Choice of Alligators

Lake

Size

Primary Food Choice

Gender ЕҪm. Fish Invertebrate Reptile Bird Other

Hancock Male

F 2.3

7

1

) 2.3

4

0

Female F 2.3 16

3

) 2.3

3

0

Oklawaha Male

F 2.3

2

2

) 2.3 13

7

Female F 2.3

3

9

) 2.3

0

1

Trafford Male

F 2.3

3

7

) 2.3

8

6

Female F 2.3

2

4

) 2.3

0

1

George

Male

F 2.3 13

10

) 2.3

9

0

Female F 2.3

3

9

) 2.3

8

1

0

0

5

0

1

2

2

2

3

1

2

3

0

0

1

6

0

0

1

0

2

0

1

0

1

0

1

6

3

5

1

1

4

0

0

0

0

2

2

0

1

2

1

0

1

0

0

1

Source: Data courtesy of Clint Moore, from an unpublished manuscript by M. F. Delaney and C. T. Moore.

TABLE 7.2 Goodness of Fit of Baseline-Category Logit Models for Table 7.1

Model a
ЕҪ. ЕҪG. ЕҪS. ЕҪ L. ЕҪL q S. ЕҪG q L q S.

G2
116.8 114.7 101.6 73.6 52.5 50.3

X2

df

106.5

60

101.2

56

86.9

56

79.6

48

58.0

44

52.6

40

Collapsed over G

ЕҪ.

81.4

ЕҪS.

66.2

ЕҪ L.

38.2

ЕҪL q S.

17.1

73.1

28

54.3

24

32.7

16

15.0

12

aG, gender; S, size; L, lake of capture. See the text for details.

270

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

TABLE 7.3 Lake Hancock
Oklawaha
Trafford
George

Observed and Fitted Values for Study of AlligatorвҖҷs Primary Food Choice

Size of alligator

Primary Food Choice

ЕҪmeters.

Fish Invertebrate Reptile Bird Other

F 2.3 ) 2.3 F 2.3 ) 2.3 F 2.3 ) 2.3 F 2.3 ) 2.3

23 ЕҪ20.9.
7 ЕҪ9.1.
5 ЕҪ5.2. 13 ЕҪ12.8.
5 ЕҪ4.4. 89 ЕҪ8.6.
16 ЕҪ18.5. 17 ЕҪ14.5.

4 ЕҪ3.6. 0 ЕҪ0.4.
11 ЕҪ12.0.
8 ЕҪ7.0.
11 ЕҪ12.4.
7 ЕҪ5.6.
19 ЕҪ16.9.
1 ЕҪ3.1.

2

2

8

ЕҪ1.9. ЕҪ2.7. ЕҪ9.9.

1

3

5

ЕҪ1.1. ЕҪ2.3. ЕҪ3.1.

1

0

3

ЕҪ1.5. ЕҪ0.2. ЕҪ1.1.

6

1

0

ЕҪ5.5. ЕҪ0.8. ЕҪ1.9.

2

1

5

ЕҪ2.1. ЕҪ0.9. ЕҪ4.2.

6

3

5

ЕҪ5.9. ЕҪ3.1. ЕҪ5.8.

1

2

3

ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ1.2. ЕҪ3.8.

0

1

3

ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ1.8. ЕҪ2.2.

collapsed table. Absolute values of standardized Pearson residuals comparing observed and fitted values exceed 2 in only two of the 40 cells and exceed 3 in none of the cells. The fit seems adequate.
Fish was the most common food choice. We now estimate the effects of lake and size on the odds that alligators select other primary food types instead of fish. With fish as the baseline category, Table 7.4 contains ML estimates of effect parameters. These result from models using dummy variables for the first three lakes and for size. The table uses letter subscripts to denote the food choice categories. For example, the prediction equation for the log odds of selecting invertebrates instead of fish is
logЕҪвҗІЛҶIrвҗІЛҶF . s y1.55 q 1.46 s y 1.66 zH q 0.94 zO q 1.12 zT ,

TABLE 7.4 Estimated Parameters in Logit Model for Alligator Food Choice,
Based on Dummy Variable for First Size Category and Each Lake Except Lake Georgea

Logit b

Intercept Size F 2.3 Hancock

logЕҪвҗІIrвҗІF . logЕҪвҗІRrвҗІF . logЕҪвҗІBrвҗІF . logЕҪвҗІOrвҗІF .

y1.55 y3.31 y2.09 y1.90

1.46 ЕҪ0.40. y0.35 ЕҪ0.58. y0.63 ЕҪ0.64.
0.33 ЕҪ0.45.

y1.66 ЕҪ0.61. 1.24 ЕҪ1.19. 0.70 ЕҪ0.78. 0.83 ЕҪ0.56.

aSE values in parentheses. I, invertebrate; R, reptile; B, bird; O, other; F, fish.

Lake Oklawaha 0.94 ЕҪ0.47. 2.46 ЕҪ1.12. y0.65 ЕҪ1.20. 0.01 ЕҪ0.78.

Trafford 1.12 ЕҪ0.49. 2.94 ЕҪ1.12. 1.09 ЕҪ0.84. 1.52 ЕҪ0.62.

NOMINAL RESPONSES: BASELINE-CATEGORY LOGIT MODELS

271

where s s 1 for size F 2.3 meters and 0 otherwise, zH is a dummy variable for Lake Hancock ЕҪ zH s 1 for alligators in that lake and 0 otherwise., and zO and zT are dummy variables for lakes Oklawaha and Trafford. Size of alligator has a noticeable effect. For a given lake, for small alligators the estimated odds that primary food choice was invertebrates instead of fish are expЕҪ1.46. s 4.3 times the estimated odds for large alligators; the Wald 95% confidence interval is expw1.46 " 1.96ЕҪ0.396.x s ЕҪ2.0, 9.3.. The lake effects indicate that the estimated odds that the primary food choice was invertebrates instead of fish are relatively higher at Lakes Trafford and Oklawaha and relatively lower at Lake Hancock than they are at Lake George.
The equations in Table 7.4 determine those for other food-choice pairs. For instance, for ЕҪinvertebrate, other.,
logЕҪвҗІЛҶIrвҗІЛҶO . s logЕҪвҗІЛҶIrвҗІЛҶF . y logЕҪвҗІЛҶOrвҗІЛҶF .
s ЕҪy1.55 q 1.46 s y 1.66 zH q 0.94 zO q 1.12 zT . y ЕҪy1.90 q 0.33s q 0.83 zH q 0.01 zO q 1.52 zT .
s 0.35 q 1.13s y 2.48 zH q 0.93 zO y 0.39 zT .

7.1.3 Estimating Response Probabilities

The equation that expresses multinomial logit models directly in terms of response probabilities Г„вҗІjЕҪx.4 is

X
expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ j x.

вҗІjЕҪx. s

Jy1

X

1 q Гқhs1 expЕҪвҗЈh q вҗӨh x.

ЕҪ 7 .2.

with вҗЈ J s 0 and вҗӨ J s 0. This follows from ЕҪ7.1., using the fact that ЕҪ7.1. also holds with j s J by setting вҗЈ J s 0 and вҗӨJ s 0. ЕҪAlso, the parameters equal zero for a baseline category for identifiability reasons; see Problem 7.26.. The denominator of ЕҪ7.2. is the same for each j. The numerators for various j sum to the denominator, so ГқjвҗІjЕҪx. s 1. For J s 2, ЕҪ7.2. simplifies to the formula of type ЕҪ5.1. used for binary logistic regression.
From Table 7.4 the estimated probability that a large alligator in Lake Hancock has invertebrates as the primary food choice is

ey1 .55y1 .66
вҗІЛҶ I s 1 q ey1 .55y1 .66 q ey3 .31q1 .24 q ey2 .09q0 .70 q ey1 .90q0 .83 s 0.023.

The estimated probabilities for reptile, bird, other, and fish are 0.072, 0.141, 0.194, and 0.570.
This example used qualitative predictors. Multinomial logit models can also contain quantitative predictors. In this study, the biologists used the size dummy variable to distinguish between adult and subadult alligators. However, the alligatorsвҖҷ actual length was measured and is quantitative. With quantitative predictors, it is informative to plot the estimated probabilities.

272

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

FIGURE 7.1 Estimated probabilities for primary food choice.

To illustrate, for alligators at one lake, Figure 7.1 plots the estimated probabilities that primary food choice is fish, invertebrate, or other ЕҪwhich combines the other, bird, and reptile categories. as a function of length. With more than two response categories, the probability for a given category need not continuously increase or decrease ЕҪProblem 7.27..

7.1.4 Fitting of Baseline-Category Logit Models*

ML fitting of multinomial logit models maximizes the likelihood subject to Г„вҗІjЕҪx.4 simultaneously satisfying the J y 1 equations that specify the model. For i s 1, . . . , n, let yi s ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yi J . represent the multinomial trial for subject i, where yi j s 1 when the response is in category j and yi j s 0 otherwise. Thus, Гқj yi j s 1. Let x i s ЕҪ xi1, . . . , xi p.X denote explanatory variable values for subject i. Let вҗӨ j s ЕҪвҗӨj1, . . . ,вҗӨj p.X denote parameters for the jth logit.
Since вҗІJ s 1 y ЕҪвҗІ 1 q РёРёРё qвҗІJy1 . and yi J s 1 y ЕҪ yi1 q РёРёРё qyi, Jy1 ., the contribution to the log likelihood by subject i is

Еҫ / J

Jy1

Jy1

Jy1

log ЕҒ вҗІj ЕҪx i . yi j s Гқ yi j logвҗІj ЕҪx i . q 1 y Гқ yi j log 1 y Гқ вҗІj ЕҪx i .

js1

js1

js1

js1

Jy1
s Гқ yi j log

вҗІjЕҪxi.
Jy1

Jy1
q log 1 y Гқ вҗІj ЕҪx i . .

js1

1 y Гқjs1вҗІ j ЕҪ x i .

js1

NOMINAL RESPONSES: BASELINE-CATEGORY LOGIT MODELS

273

Thus, the baseline-category logits are the natural parameters for the multino-

mial distribution.

Now assume n independent observations. In the last expression above,

substituting

X
вҗЈj q вҗӨjxi

for

the

logit in

the

first

term

and

вҗІJ ЕҪx i. s

1rw1 q ГқJjsy11 exp ЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨXj x i.x in the second term, the log likelihood is

ВҪ 5 n
log ЕҒ
is1

J
ЕҒ вҗІjЕҪxi. yij
js1

n
sГқ
is1

Jy1

Jy1

X

X

Гқ yi j ЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ j x i . y log 1 q Гқ expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ j x i .

js1

js1

Еҫ / Еҫ / Jy1

n

p

n

s Гқ вҗЈj Гқ yi j q Гқ вҗӨjk Гқ xik yi j

js1

is1

ks1

is1

n

Jy1

X

y Гқ log 1 q Гқ expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ j x i . .

is1

js1

The sufficient statistic for вҗӨjk is Гқi xik yi j, j s 1, . . . , J y 1, k s 1, . . . , p. The sufficient statistic for вҗЈj is Гқi yi j s Гқi xi0 yi j for xi0 s 1; this is the total number of outcomes in category j.
The likelihood equations equate the sufficient statistics to their expected values. The log likelihood is concave, and the NewtonбҺҗRaphson method yields the ML parameter estimates. The estimators have large-sample normal distributions. Their asymptotic standard errors are square roots of diagonal elements of the inverse information matrix.
Most statistical software can fit multinomial logit models, but some can fit only binary logistic regression models. An alternative fitting approach fits binary logit models separately for the J y 1 pairings of responses: model ЕҪ7.1. for j s 1 alone, using only observations in category 1 or J of the response variable to obtain estimates of вҗЈ1 and вҗӨ1; model ЕҪ7.1. using only categories 2 and J to obtain estimates of вҗЈ2 and вҗӨ2; in this manner, obtaining J y 1 separate fits of logit models. A logit model fitted using data from only two response categories is the same as a regular logit model fitted conditional on classification into one of those categories. For instance, the jth baseline-category logit is a logit of conditional probabilities

вҗІjЕҪx.rЕҪвҗІjЕҪx. q вҗІJ ЕҪx. .

вҗІ j ЕҪ x.

log вҗІJ ЕҪx. rЕҪвҗІj ЕҪx. q вҗІJ ЕҪx. . s log вҗІJ ЕҪx. .

The separate-fitting estimates differ from the ML estimates for simultaneous fitting of the J y 1 logits. They are less efficient, tending to have larger standard errors. However, Begg and Gray ЕҪ1984. showed that the efficiency loss is minor when the response category having highest prevalence is the

274

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

baseline. To illustrate this approach, we used the data for the categories
invertebrate and fish alone. The fit is logЕҪвҗІЛҶIrвҗІЛҶF . s y1.69 q 1.66 s y
1.78 zH q 1.05 zO q 1.22 zT , with standard errors ЕҪ0.43, 0.62, 0.49, 0.52. for the effects. The effects are similar to those from simultaneous fitting with all five response categoriesбҺҸsee the first row of Table 7.4. The estimated
standard errors are only slightly larger, since 155 of the 219 observations
were in the fish or invertebrate categories of food type.

7.1.5 Multicategory Logit Model as Multivariate GLM*

For a univariate response variable in the natural exponential family, a GLM has form gЕҪвҗ®i. s x iX вҗӨ for a link function g, expected response вҗ®i s EЕҪYi., vector of values x i of p explanatory variables for observation i, and parameter vector вҗӨ s ЕҪвҗӨ1, . . . , вҗӨp.X. This extends to a multivariate GLM for distributions in the multivariate exponential family ЕҪProblem 7.24., such as the
multinomial. Let yi s ЕҪ yi1, yi2 , . . . .X be a vector response for subject i, with вҗ®i s EЕҪYi..
Let g be a vector of link functions. The multivariate GLM has the form

gЕҪвҗ®i. s XiвҗӨ,

ЕҪ 7 .3.

where row h of the model matrix X i for observation i contains values of explanatory variables for yih. For details, see Fahrmeir and Tutz ЕҪ2001, Chap. 3..

The baseline-category logit model is a multivariate GLM. Here yi s

ЕҪ

yi1,

.

.

.

,

yi,

X
Jy1 . ,

since

yi J

is

redundant.

Then,

вҗ®i s ЕҪвҗІ 1ЕҪx i., . . . , вҗІJy1ЕҪx i..X

and

gj ЕҪ вҗ®i . s logГ„вҗ®i jr 1 y ЕҪ вҗ®i1 q РёРёРё qвҗ®i, Jy1 . 4 .

0 The model matrix for observation i is

1 x iX

Xi s

1 x iX . РёРёРё 1 x iX

with

0

entries

in

other

locations,

and

вҗӨX

s

ЕҪвҗЈ1,

X
вҗӨ1,

.

.

.

,

вҗЈ

Jy1

,

X
вҗӨ Jy1

..

One

can

also formulate it for grouped data using sample proportions in the categories.

7.2 ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LOGIT MODELS
In Section 6.4.1 we showed the benefits of utilizing the ordinality of a variable by focusing inferences on a single parameter. These benefits extend to models for ordinal responses. Models with terms that reflect ordinal

ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LOGIT MODELS

275

characteristics such as monotone trend have improved model parsimony and power. In this section we introduce the most popular logit model for ordinal responses.

7.2.1 Cumulative Logits

One way to use category ordering forms logits of cumulative probabilities,
P ЕҪ Y F j < x. s вҗІ 1ЕҪx. q РёРёРё qвҗІj ЕҪx. , j s 1, . . . , J.

The cumulatiВ®e logits are defined as
logit P ЕҪ Y F j < x. s log P ЕҪ Y F j < x. 1 y P ЕҪ Y F j < x. вҗІ 1ЕҪx. q РёРёРё qвҗІj ЕҪx.
s log вҗІjq1ЕҪx. q РёРёРё qвҗІJ ЕҪx. ,

j s 1, . . . , J y 1. ЕҪ7.4.

Each cumulative logit uses all J response categories. A model for logitw PЕҪY F j.x alone is an ordinary logit model for a binary
response in which categories 1 to j form one outcome and categories j q 1 to J form the second. Better, models can use all J y 1 cumulative logits in a single parsimonious model.

7.2.2 Proportional Odds Model

A model that simultaneously uses all cumulative logits is

logit

PЕҪ Y F j < x.

X
s вҗЈj q вҗӨ x,

j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

ЕҪ 7 .5 .

Each cumulative logit has its own intercept. The Г„вҗЈj4 are increasing in j, since PЕҪY F j < x. increases in j for fixed x, and the logit is an increasing function of this probability.
This model has the same effects вҗӨ for each logit. For a continuous predictor x, Figure 7.2 depicts the model when J s 4. For fixed j, the

FIGURE 7.2 Cumulative logit model with effect independent of cutpoint.

276

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

FIGURE 7.3 Category probabilities in cumulative logit model.

response curve is a logistic regression curve for a binary response with outcomes Y F j and Y ) j. The response curves for j s 1, 2, and 3 have the same shape. They share exactly the same rate of increase or decrease but are horizontally displaced from each other. For j - k, the curve for PЕҪY F k. is the curve for PЕҪY F j. translated by ЕҪвҗЈk y вҗЈj.rвҗӨ units in the x direction; that is,
P ЕҪ Y F k < X s x . s P ЕҪ Y F j < X s x q ЕҪвҗЈk y вҗЈj . rвҗӨ . .

Figure 7.3 portrays the curves for the category probabilities. The cumulative logit model ЕҪ7.5. satisfies

logit P ЕҪ Y F j < x1 . y logit P ЕҪ Y F j < x 2 .

P ЕҪ Y F j < x1 .rP ЕҪ Y ) j < x1 . X

s log

s вҗӨ ЕҪx1 y x2..

P ЕҪ Y F j < x 2 .rP ЕҪ Y ) j < x 2 .

An odds ratio of cumulative probabilities is called a cumulatiВ®e odds ratio. The odds of making response F j at x s x1 are expwвҗӨXЕҪx1 y x 2 .x times the odds at x s x 2. The log cumulative odds ratio is proportional to the distance between x1 and x 2. The same proportionality constant applies to each logit. Because of this property, McCullagh ЕҪ1980. called ЕҪ7.5. a proportional odds
model.

ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LOGIT MODELS

277

FIGURE 7.4 Uniform odds ratios ADrBC whenever x1 y x2 s 1, for all response cutpoints with proportional odds model.

With a single predictor, the cumulative odds ratio equals e вҗӨ whenever
x1 y x2 s 1. Figure 7.4 illustrates the constant cumulative odds ratio this model then implies for all j. It shows the J-category response collapsed into the binary outcome ЕҪF j, ) j. and shows the sets of cells that determine the cumulative odds ratio ADrBC that takes the same value e вҗӨ for each
such collapsing. Model ЕҪ7.5. constrains the J y 1 response curves to have the same shape.
Thus, its fit is not the same as fitting separate logit models for each j. Again let ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yi J . be binary indicators of the response for subject i. The likelihood function is

n

J

n

J

ЕҒ ЕҒ вҗІjЕҪxi. yij s ЕҒ ЕҒ ЕҪ P ЕҪY F j < x i. y P ЕҪY F j y 1 < x i.. yij

is1 js1

is1 js1

n
sЕҒ
is1

Еҫ / J

X
expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ x i .

X

yi j

expЕҪвҗЈjy1 q вҗӨ x i .

ЕҒ

Xy

X

,

js1 1 q expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ x i . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈjy1 q вҗӨ x i .

ЕҪ 7 .6.

viewed as a function of ЕҪГ„вҗЈj4, вҗӨ.. McCullagh ЕҪ1980. and Walker and Duncan ЕҪ1967. used Fisher scoring algorithms to obtain ML estimates.

7.2.3 Latent Variable Motivation*
A regression model for a continuous variable assumed to underlie Y motivates the common effect вҗӨ for different j in the proportional odds model ЕҪAnderson and Philips 1981.. Let Y * denote this underlying variable. In statistics, such an unobserved variable is called a latent В®ariable. Suppose that it has cdf GЕҪ y* y вҗ©., where values of y* vary around a location parameter вҗ© ЕҪsuch as a mean. that depends on x through вҗ©ЕҪx. s вҗӨX x. Suppose that yПұ s вҗЈ0 - вҗЈ1 - РёРёРё - вҗЈ J s Пұ are cutpoints of the continuous scale such

278

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

FIGURE 7.5 Ordinal measurement and underlying regression model for a latent variable.
that the observed response Y satisfies
Y s j if вҗЈjy1 - Y * F вҗЈj .
That is, Y falls in category j when the latent variable falls in the jth interval of values ЕҪFigure 7.5.. Then
P ЕҪ Y F j < x. s P ЕҪ Y * F вҗЈj < x. s GЕҪвҗЈj y вҗӨX x. .
The appropriate model for Y implies that the link Gy1, the inverse of the cdf for Y *, applies to PЕҪY F j < x.. If Y * s вҗӨX x q в‘Җ , where the cdf G of в‘Җ is the logistic ЕҪSection 4.2.5., then Gy1 is the logit link and a proportional odds model results. Normality for в‘Җ implies a probit link for cumulative probabilities ЕҪSection 7.3.1..
In this derivation, the same parameters вҗӨ occur for the effects on Y regardless of how the cutpoints Г„вҗЈj4 chop up the scale for the latent variable. The effect parameters are invariant to the choice of categories for Y. If a continuous variable measuring political philosophy has a linear regression with some predictor variables, then the same effect parameters apply to a discrete version of political philosophy with the categories ЕҪliberal, moderate, conservative. or ЕҪvery liberal, slightly liberal, moderate, slightly conservative, very conservative.. This feature makes it possible to compare estimates from studies using different response scales.

ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LOGIT MODELS

279

Note that the use of a cdf of form GЕҪ y* y вҗ©. for the latent variable

X

X

results in linear predictor вҗЈj y вҗӨ x rather than вҗЈj q вҗӨ x. When вҗӨ ) 0, as x

increases each cumulative logit then decreases, so each cumulative probabil-

ity decreases and relatively less probability mass falls at the low end of the Y

scale. Thus, Y tends to be larger at higher values of x. With this parameterization the sign of вҗӨ has the usual meaning. However, most software ЕҪe.g., SAS. uses form ЕҪ7.5..

7.2.4 Mental Impairment Example
Table 7.5 comes from a study of mental health for a random sample of adult residents of Alachua County, Florida. It relates mental impairment to two explanatory variables. Mental impairment is an ordinal response, with categories ЕҪwell, mild symptom formation, moderate symptom formation, impaired.. The life events index x1 is a composite measure of the number and severity of important life events such as birth of child, new job, divorce, or death in family that occurred to the subject within the past 3 years. Socioeconomic status ЕҪ x2 s SES. is measured here as binary ЕҪ1 s high, 0 s low..

TABLE 7.5 Mental Impairment by SES and Life Events

Mental Subject Impairment

1

Well

2

Well

3

Well

4

Well

5

Well

6

Well

7

Well

8

Well

9

Well

10

Well

11

Well

12

Well

13

Mild

14

Mild

15

Mild

16

Mild

17

Mild

18

Mild

19

Mild

20

Mild

a0, low; 1, high.

SES a x2
1 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1

Life Events
x1
1 9 4 3 2 0 1 3 3 7 1 2 5 6 3 1 8 2 5 5

Subject
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40

Mental Impairment
Mild Mild Mild Mild Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Impaired Impaired Impaired Impaired Impaired Impaired Impaired Impaired Impaired

SES a x2
1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0

Life Events
x1
9 3 3 1 0 4 3 9 6 4 3 8 2 7 5 4 4 8 8 9

280

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

TABLE 7.6 Output for Fitting Cumulative Logit Model to Table 7.5

Score Test for the Proportional Odds Assumption

Chi- Square

DF

Pr ) ChiSq

2.3255

4

0.6761

Parameter Intercept1 Intercept2 Intercept3 life ses

Estimate y0.2819
1.2128 2.2094 y0.3189 1.1112

Std Error 0.6423 0.6607 0.7210 0.1210 0.6109

Like. Ratio 95% Conf Limits
y1.5615 0.9839 y0.0507 2.5656
0.8590 3.7123 y0.5718 y0.0920 y0.0641 2.3471

ChiSquare
0.19 3.37 9.39 6.95 3.31

Pr > Chi Sq 0.6607 0.0664 0.0022 0.0084 0.0689

The main-effects model of form ЕҪ7.5. is
logit P ЕҪ Y F j < x. s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1 x1 q вҗӨ2 x2 .
Table 7.6 shows output. With J s 4 response categories, the model has three Г„вҗЈj4 intercepts. Usually, these are not of interest except for computing response probabilities. The parameter estimates yield estimated logits and hence estimates of PЕҪY F j., PЕҪY ) j., or PЕҪY s j.. We illustrate for subjects at the mean life events score of x1 s 4.275 with low SES ЕҪ x2 s 0.. Since
вҗЈЛҶ1 s y0.282, the estimated probability of response well is PЛҶЕҪ Y s 1. s PЛҶЕҪ Y F 1. s 1 s exp q exp y0.282 y 0.319ЕҪ4.275. 0.16. y0.282 y 0.319ЕҪ4.275.
Figure 7.6 plots PЛҶЕҪY ) 2. as a function of the life events index, at the two
levels of SES.

FIGURE 7.6 Estimated values of PЕҪY ) 2. for Table 7.5.

ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LOGIT MODELS

281

The effect estimates вҗӨЛҶ1 s y0.319 and вҗӨЛҶ2 s 1.111 suggest that the cumu-
lative probability starting at the well end of the scale decreases as the life events score increases and increases at the higher level of SES. Given the life events score, at the high SES level the estimated odds of mental impairment below any fixed level are e1.111 s 3.0 times the estimated odds at the low SES level.
Descriptions of effects can compare cumulative probabilities rather than use odds ratios. These can be easier to understand. We describe effects of quantitative variables by comparing probabilities at their quartiles. We describe effects of qualitative variables by comparing probabilities for different categories. We control for quantitative variables by setting them at their mean. We control for qualitative variables by fixing the category, unless there are several, in which case we can set each at their dummy means. We illustrate again with PЕҪY s 1., the well outcome. First, we describe the SES
effect. At the mean life events of 4.275, PЛҶЕҪY s 1. s 0.37 at high SES ЕҪi.e.,
x2 s 1. and 0.16 at low SES ЕҪ x2 s 0.. Next, we describe the life events effect. The lower and upper quartiles of the life events score are 2.0 and 6.5. For
high SES, PЛҶЕҪY s 1. changes from 0.55 to 0.22 between these quartiles; for
low SES, it changes from 0.28 to 0.09. ЕҪNote that comparing 0.55 to 0.28 at the lower quartile and 0.22 to 0.09 at the upper quartile provides further information about the SES effect.. The sample effect is substantial for both predictors.
The output in Table 7.6, taken from SAS, also presents a score test of the proportional odds property. This tests whether the effects are the same for each cumulative logit against the alternative of separate effects. It compares the model with one parameter for x1 and one for x2 to a more complex model with three parameters for each, allowing different effects for logitw PЕҪY F 1., logitw PЕҪY F 2.x, and logitw PЕҪY F 3.x. Here, the score statistic equals 2.33. It has df s 4, since the more complex model has four additional parameters. The more complex model does not fit significantly better ЕҪ P s 0.68..

7.2.5 More Complex Models More complex cumulative logit models are formulated as in ordinary logistic regression. They simply require a set of intercept parameters rather than a single one. In the previous example, for instance, permitting interaction yields a model with ML fit
logit PЛҶЕҪ Y F j < x. s вҗЈЛҶj y 0.420 x1 q 0.371 x2 q 0.181 x1 x2 ,
where the coefficient of x1 x2 has SE s 0.238. The estimated effect of life events on the cumulative logit is y0.420 for the low SES group and ЕҪy0.420 q 0.181. s y0.239 for the high SES group. The impact of life

282

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

events seems more severe for the low SES group, but the difference in effects is not significant.
Models in this section used the proportional odds assumption of the same effects for different cumulative logits. An advantage is that effects are simple to summarize and interpret, requiring only a single parameter for each predictor. The models generalize to include separate effects, replacing вҗӨ in ЕҪ7.5. by вҗӨ j. This implies nonparallelism of curves for different logits. However, curves for different cumulative probabilities then cross for some x values. Such models violate the proper order among the cumulative probabilities.
Even if such a model fits better over the observed range of x, for reasons of parsimony the simple model might be preferable. One case is when effects
Г„вҗӨЛҶ j4 with different logits are not substantially different in practical terms.
Then the significance in a test of proportional odds may reflect primarily a large value of n. Even with smaller n, although effect estimators using the simple model are biased, they may have smaller MSE than estimators from a more complex model having many more parameters. So even if a test of proportional odds has a small P-value, donвҖҷt discard this model automatically.
If a proportional odds model fits poorly in terms of practical as well as statistical significance, alternative strategies exist. These include ЕҪ1. trying a link function for which the response curve is nonsymmetric ЕҪe.g., complementary log-log.; ЕҪ2. adding additional terms, such as interactions, to the linear predictor; ЕҪ3. adding dispersion parameters; ЕҪ4. permitting separate effects for each logit for some but not all predictors ЕҪi.e., partial proportional odds; and ЕҪ5. fitting baseline-category logit models and using the ordinality in an informal way in interpreting the associations. For approach ЕҪ4., see Peterson and Harrell ЕҪ1990., Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000, Sec. 15.13., and criticism by Cox ЕҪ1995.. In the next section we generalize the cumulative logit model to permit extensions ЕҪ1. and ЕҪ3..

7.3 ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LINK MODELS
Cumulative logit models use the logit link. As in univariate GLMs, other link functions are possible. Let Gy1 denote a link function that is the inverse of the continuous cdf G ЕҪrecall Section 4.2.5.. The cumulatiВ®e link model

Gy1

PЕҪ Y F j < x.

X
s вҗЈj q вҗӨ x

ЕҪ 7 .7.

links the cumulative probabilities to the linear predictor. The logit link function Gy1ЕҪu. s logw urЕҪ1 y u.x is the inverse of the standard logistic cdf.
As in the proportional odds model ЕҪ7.5., effects of x in ЕҪ7.7. are assumed the same for each cutpoint, j s 1, . . . , J y 1. In Section 7.2.3 we showed that this assumption holds when a linear regression for a latent variable Y * has

ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LINK MODELS

283

standardized cdf G. Model ЕҪ7.7. results from discrete measurement of Y * from a location-parameter family having cdf GЕҪ y* y вҗӨX x.. The parameters Г„вҗЈj4 are category cutpoints on a standardized version of the latent scale. In this sense, cumulative link models are regression models, using a linear predictor вҗӨX x to describe effects of explanatory variables on crude ordinal
measurement of Y *. Using yвҗӨ rather than qвҗӨ in the linear predictor
merely results in change of sign of вҗӨЛҶ. Most software ЕҪe.g., GENMOD and
LOGISTIC in SAS. fits it in qвҗӨ form.

7.3.1 Types of Cumulative Links

Use of the standard normal cdf вҢҪ for G gives the cumulatiВ®e probit model. This generalizes the binary probit model ЕҪSection 6.6. to ordinal responses. It

is appropriate when the distribution for Y * is normal. Parameters in probit

models can be interpreted in terms of the latent variable Y *. For instance, consider the model вҢҪy1w PЕҪY F j.x s вҗЈj y вҗӨ x. From Section 7.2.3, since Y * s вҗӨ x q в‘Җ where в‘Җ ; NЕҪ0, 1. has cdf вҢҪ, вҗӨ has the interpretation that a 1-unit increase in x corresponds to a вҗӨ increase in EЕҪY *.. When в‘Җ need not

be in standardized form with вҗҙ s 1, a 1-unit increase in x corresponds to a вҗӨ standard deviation increase in EЕҪY *.. Cumulative logit models provide fits

similar to those for cumulative probit models, and their parameter interpre-

tation is simpler.

An underlying extreme value distribution for Y * implies a model of the

form

logГ„ylog

1 y PЕҪ Y F j < x.

X
4 s вҗЈj q вҗӨ x .

In section 6.6 we introduced this complementary log-log link for binary data. The ordinal model using this link is sometimes called a proportional hazards model since it results from a generalization of the proportional hazards model for survival data to handle grouped survival times ЕҪPrentice and Gloeckler 1978.. It has the property
P ЕҪ Y ) j < x1 . s P ЕҪ Y ) j < x 2 . exp wвҗӨ . XЕҪx1yx 2.x
With this link, PЕҪY F j. approaches 1.0 at a faster rate than it approaches 0.0. The related log-log link logГ„ylogwPЕҪY F j.x4 is appropriate when the complementary log-log link holds for the categories listed in reverse order.

7.3.2 Estimation for Cumulative Link Models
McCullagh ЕҪ1980. and Thompson and Baker ЕҪ1981. treated cumulative link models as multivariate GLMs. McCullagh presented a Fisher scoring algorithm for ML estimation, expressing the likelihood in the form ЕҪ7.6. using cumulative probabilities. McCullagh showed that sufficiently large n guarantees a unique maximum of the likelihood. Burridge ЕҪ1981. and Pratt ЕҪ1981.

284

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

showed that the log likelihood is concave for many cumulative link models, including the logit, probit, and complementary log-log. Iterative algorithms usually converge rapidly to the ML estimates.

7.3.3 Life Table Example
Table 7.7 shows the life-length distribution for U.S. residents in 1981, by race and gender. Life length uses five ordered categories. The underlying continuous cdf of life length increases slowly at small to moderate ages but increases sharply at older ages. This suggests the complementary log-log link. This link also results from assuming that the hazard rate increases exponentially with age, which happens for an extreme value distribution ЕҪthe Gompertz..
For gender G ЕҪ1 s female; 0 s male., race R ЕҪ1 s black; 0 s white., and life length Y, Table 7.7 contains fitted distributions for the model
logГ„ylog 1 y P ЕҪ Y F j < G s g , R s r . 4 s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1 g q вҗӨ2 r .
Goodness-of-fit statistics are irrelevant, since the table contains population distributions. The model describes well the four distributions. Its parameter values are вҗӨ1 s y0.658 and вҗӨ2 s 0.626. The fitted cdfвҖҷs satisfy
P ЕҪ Y ) j < G s 0, R s r . s P ЕҪ Y ) j < G s 1, R s r . exp ЕҪ0.658..
Given race, the proportion of men living longer than a fixed time equaled the proportion for women raised to the exp ЕҪ0.658. s 1.93 power. Given gender, the proportion of blacks living longer than a fixed time equaled the proportion for whites to the expЕҪ0.626. s 1.87 power. The вҗӨ1 and вҗӨ2 values indicate that white men and black women had similar distributions, that white women tended to have longest lives and black men tended to have shortest lives. If the probability of living longer than some fixed time equaled вҗІ for white women, that probability was about вҗІ 2 for white men and black women and вҗІ 4 for black men.

TABLE 7.7 Life-Length Distribution of U.S. Residents (Percent),a 1981

Males

Females

Life Length
0бҺҗ20 20бҺҗ40 40бҺҗ50 50бҺҗ60 Over 65

White 2.4 ЕҪ2.4. 3.4 ЕҪ3.5. 3.8 ЕҪ4.4. 17.5 ЕҪ16.7. 72.9 ЕҪ73.0.

Black 3.6 ЕҪ4.4. 7.5 ЕҪ6.4. 8.3 ЕҪ7.7. 25.0 ЕҪ26.1. 55.6 ЕҪ55.4.

White 1.6 ЕҪ1.2. 1.4 ЕҪ1.9. 2.2 ЕҪ2.4. 9.9 ЕҪ9.6. 84.9 ЕҪ84.9.

Black 2.7 ЕҪ2.3. 2.9 ЕҪ3.4. 4.4 ЕҪ4.3. 16.3 ЕҪ16.3. 73.7 ЕҪ73.7.

aValues in parentheses are fit of proportional hazards ЕҪi.e., complementary log-log link. model. Source: Data from Statistical Abstract of the United States ЕҪWashington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1984., p. 69.

ORDINAL RESPONSES: CUMULATIVE LINK MODELS

285

7.3.4 Incorporating Dispersion Effects*
For cumulative link models, settings of the explanatory variables are stochastically ordered on the response: For any pair x1 and x 2 , either PЕҪY F j < x1. F PЕҪY F j < x 2 . for all j or PЕҪY F j < x1. G PЕҪY F j < x 2 . for all j. Figure 7.7a illustrates for underlying continuous density functions and cdfвҖҷs at two settings of x. When this is violated and such models fit poorly, often it is because the dispersion also varies with x. For instance, perhaps responses tend to concentrate around the same location but more dispersion occurs at x1 than at x 2. Then perhaps PЕҪY F j < x1. ) PЕҪY F j < x 2 . for small j but PЕҪY F j < x1. - PЕҪY F j < x 2 . for large j. In other words, at x1 the responses concentrate more at the extreme categories than at x 2. Figure 7.7b illustrates for underlying continuous distributions.
A cumulative link model that incorporates dispersion effects is

X
вҗЈj q вҗӨ x
G exp y1 P ЕҪ Y F j < x. s ЕҪ вҗҘX x. .

ЕҪ 7 .8.

ЕҪAgain, one can replace q by y to more closely mimic a locationбҺҗscale family for an underlying continuous variable.. The denominator contains

FIGURE 7.7 ЕҪ a. Distribution 1 stochastically higher than distribution 2; ЕҪ b. distributions not stochastically ordered.

286

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

scale parameters вҗҘ that describe the dispersionвҖҷs dependence on x. The ordinary model ЕҪ7.7. is the special case вҗҘ s 0. Otherwise, the cumulative probabilities tend to shrink toward each other when вҗҘX x ) 0. This creates higher probabilities in the end categories and overall greater dispersion. The cumulative probabilities tend to move apart ЕҪcreating less dispersion. when вҗҘX x - 0.
To illustrate, we use this model to compare two groups on an ordinal scale. Suppose that x is a dummy variable with x s 1 for the first group. With cumulative logits, model ЕҪ7.8. is
logit P ЕҪ Y F j . s вҗЈj , x s 0,
logit P ЕҪ Y F j. s ЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ .rexpЕҪ вҗҘ . , x s 1.
The case вҗҘ s 0 is the usual model, in which вҗӨ is a location shift that determines a common cumulative log odds ratio for all 2 = 2 collapsings of the 2 = J table. When вҗҘ / 0 the difference between the logits for the two groups, and hence the cumulative odds ratio, varies as j does. When вҗҘ ) 0, responses at x s 1 tend to be more disperse than at x s 0. See Cox ЕҪ1995. and McCullagh ЕҪ1980. for model fitting and examples.

7.4 ALTERNATIVE MODELS FOR ORDINAL RESPONSES*
Models for ordinal responses need not use cumulative probabilities. In this section we discuss alternative logit models and a simpler model that resembles ordinary regression.

7.4.1 Adjacent-Categories Logits The adjacent-categories logits are
logit P ЕҪ Y s j < Y s j or j q 1. s log вҗІj ,
вҗІ jq1

j s 1, . . . , J y 1. ЕҪ7.9.

These logits are a basic set equivalent to the baseline-category logits. The connections are

log s вҗІ j log q вҗІ j log q вҗІ jq1 РёРёРё qlog вҗІJy1 ,

вҗІJ

вҗІ jq1

вҗІ jq2

вҗІJ

ЕҪ 7 .10.

and

log s вҗІ j log y вҗІ j log вҗІ jq1 ,

вҗІ jq1

вҗІJ

вҗІJ

j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

Еҫ / Either set determines logits for all J pairs of response categories. 2

ALTERNATIVE MODELS FOR ORDINAL RESPONSES

287

Models using adjacent-categories logits can be expressed as baseline-category logit models. For instance, consider the adjacent-categories logit model

вҗІ j ЕҪ x.

X

log

s вҗЈj q вҗӨ x,

вҗІ jq1 ЕҪ x.

j s 1, . . . , J y 1,

ЕҪ 7 .11.

with common effect вҗӨ. From adding ЕҪ J y j. terms as in ЕҪ7.10., the equivalent baseline-category logit model is

вҗІ j ЕҪ x. Jy1 X

log

s Гқ вҗЈk q вҗӨ ЕҪ J y j.x,

вҗІJ ЕҪ x. ksj

j s 1, . . . , J y 1

X
s вҗЈj* q вҗӨ u j , j s 1, . . . , J y 1

with u j s ЕҪ J y j.x. The adjacent-categories logit model corresponds to a baseline-category logit model with adjusted model matrix but also a single parameter for each predictor. With some software one can fit model ЕҪ7.11. by fitting the equivalent baseline-category logit model.
The construction of the adjacent-categories logits recognizes the ordering of Y categories. To benefit from this in model parsimony requires appropriate specification of the linear predictor. For instance, if an explanatory variable has similar effect for each logit, advantages accrue from having a single parameter instead of ЕҪ J y 1. parameters describing that effect. When used with this proportional odds form, model ЕҪ7.11. with adjacent-categories logits fit well in similar situations as model ЕҪ7.5. with cumulative logits. They both imply stochastically ordered distributions for Y at different predictor values.
The choice of model should depend less on goodness of fit than on whether one prefers effects to refer to individual response categories, as the adjacent-categories logits provide, or instead to groupings of categories using the entire scale or an underlying latent variable, which cumulative logits provide. Since effects in cumulative logit models refer to the entire scale, they are usually larger. The ratio of estimate to standard error, however, is usually similar for the two model types. An advantage of the cumulative logit model is the approximate invariance of effect estimates to the choice and number of response categories. This does not happen with the adjacent-categories logits.

7.4.2 Job Satisfaction Example Table 7.8 refers to the relationship between job satisfaction ЕҪY . and income, stratified by gender, for black Americans. For simplicity, we use income scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4.. For income x and gender g ЕҪ1 s females, 0 s males., consider the model
logЕҪвҗІjrвҗІjq1 . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1 x q вҗӨ2 g , j s 1, 2, 3.

288

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

TABLE 7.8 Job Satisfaction and Income, Controlling for Gender

Job Satisfaction

Gender

Income ЕҪdollars.

Very Dissatisfied

A Little Satisfied

Moderately Satisfied

Female - 5000

1

5000бҺҗ15,000

2

15,000бҺҗ25,000

0

) 25,000

0

Male

- 5000

1

5000бҺҗ15,000

0

15,000бҺҗ25,000

0

) 25,000

0

3

11

3

17

1

8

2

4

1

2

3

5

0

7

1

9

Source:1991, General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

Very Satisfied
2 3 5 2
1 1 3 6

It describes the odds of being very dissatisfied instead of a little satisfied, a little instead of moderately satisfied, and moderately instead of very satisfied.
This model is equivalent to the baseline-category logit model
logЕҪвҗІjrвҗІ4 . s вҗЈjU q вҗӨ1ЕҪ4 y j . x q вҗӨ2 ЕҪ4 y j . g , j s 1, 2, 3.
The value of the first predictor in this model is set equal to 3 x in the equation for logЕҪвҗІ 1rвҗІ4., 2 x in the equation for logЕҪвҗІ 2rвҗІ4., and x in the equation for logЕҪвҗІ 3rвҗІ4.. Some software ЕҪe.g., PROC CATMOD in SAS; see Table A.12. allows one to enter a row of a model matrix for each baselinecategory logit at a given setting of predictors. Then, after fitting the baseline-category logit model that constrains the effects to be the same for each logit, the estimated regression parameters are the ML estimates of parameters for the adjacent-categories logit model. The ML fit gives
вҗӨЛҶ1 s y0.389 ЕҪSE s 0.155. and вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.045 ЕҪSE s 0.314.. For this parameterization, вҗӨЛҶ1 - 0 means the odds of lower job satisfaction decrease as income
increases. Given gender, the estimated odds of response in the lower of two adjacent categories multiplies by expЕҪy0.389. s 0.68 for each category increase in income. The model describes 24 logits ЕҪthree for each income = gender combination. with five parameters. Its deviance G2 s 12.6 with df s 19. This model with a linear trend for the income effect and a lack of interaction between income and gender seems adequate.
Similar substantive results occur with a cumulative logit model. Its de-
viance G2 s 13.3 with df s 19. The income effect is larger ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ1 s y0.51,
SE s 0.20., since it refers to the entire response scale rather than adjacent
categories. However, significance is similar, with вҗӨЛҶ1rSE f y2.5 for each
model.

ALTERNATIVE MODELS FOR ORDINAL RESPONSES

289

7.4.3 Continuation-Ratio Logits Continuation-ratio logits are defined as
log вҗІj , вҗІ jq1 q РёРёРё qвҗІJ

j s 1, . . . , J y 1

or as

log вҗІ jq1 , вҗІ 1 q РёРёРё qвҗІj

j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

ЕҪ 7 .12. ЕҪ 7 .13.

The continuation-ratio logit model form is useful when a sequential mecha-
nism, such as survival through various age periods, determines the response outcome ЕҪe.g., Tutz 1991.. Let вҗ»j s PЕҪY s j < Y G j.. With explanatory variables,

вҗ»jЕҪx. s вҗІjЕҪx. , вҗІj ЕҪx. q РёРёРё qвҗІJ ЕҪx.

j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

ЕҪ 7 .14.

The continuation-ratio logits ЕҪ7.12. are ordinary logits of these conditional probabilities: namely, logw вҗ»jЕҪx.rЕҪ1 y вҗ»jЕҪx..x.
At the ith setting x i of x, let Г„ yi j, j s 1, . . . , J 4 denote the response counts, with ni s Гқj yi j. When ni s 1, yi j indicates whether the response is in category j, as in Section 7.1.4. Let bЕҪ n, y; вҗ» . denote the binomial probabil-
ity of y successes in n trials with parameter вҗ» for each trial. By expressing the multinomial probability of ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yi J . in the form pЕҪ yi1. pЕҪ yi2 < yi1. РёРёРё pЕҪ yi J < yi1, . . . , yi, Jy1 ., one can show that the multinomial mass function has factorization

b ni , yi1; вҗ»1ЕҪ x i . b ni y yi1 , yi2 ; вҗ» 2 ЕҪ x i . РёРёРё b ni y yi1 y РёРёРё yyi, Jy2 , yi, Jy1 ; вҗ»Jy1 ЕҪ x i . .

ЕҪ 7 .15.

The full likelihood is the product of multinomial mass functions from the
different x i values. Thus, the log likelihood is a sum of terms such that different вҗ»j enter into different terms. When parameters in the model specification for logitЕҪ вҗ»j. are distinct from those for logitЕҪ вҗ»k . whenever j / k, maximizing each term separately maximizes the full log likelihood. Thus, separate fitting of models for different continuation-ratio logits gives the same results as simultaneous fitting. The sum of the J y 1 separate G2
statistics provides an overall goodness-of-fit statistic pertaining to the simul-
taneous fitting of J y 1 models.
Because these logits refer to a binary response in which one category
combines levels of the original scale, separate fitting can use methods for binary logit models. Similar remarks apply to continuation-ratio logits ЕҪ7.13.,

290

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

although those logits and the subsequent analysis do not give equivalent results. Sometimes, simpler models with the same effects for each logit are plausible ЕҪMcCullagh and Nelder 1989, p. 164; Tutz 1991..

7.4.4 Developmental Toxicity Study with Pregnant Mice
We illustrate continuation-ratio logits using Table 7.9 from a developmental toxicity study. Such experiments with rodents test substances posing potential danger to developing fetuses. Diethylene glycol dimethyl ether ЕҪdiEGdiME., one such substance, is an industrial solvent used in the manufacture of protective coatings such as lacquer and metal coatings.
This study administered diEGdiME in distilled water to pregnant mice. Each mouse was exposed to one of five concentration levels for 10 days early in the pregnancy. The mice exposed to level 0 formed a control group. Two days later, the uterine contents of the pregnant mice were examined for defects. Each fetus has three possible outcomes ЕҪnonlive, malformation, normal.. The outcomes are ordered, with nonlive the least desirable result. We use continuation-ratio logits to model ЕҪ1. the probability вҗІ 1 of a nonlive fetus, and ЕҪ2. the conditional probability вҗІ 2rЕҪвҗІ 2 q вҗІ 3. of a malformed fetus, given that the fetus was live.
We fitted the continuation-ratio logit models

log вҗІ 1ЕҪ xi .

s вҗЈ1 q вҗӨ1 xi ,

вҗІ2ЕҪ xi. q вҗІ3ЕҪ xi.

log s вҗІ 2 ЕҪ xi . вҗЈ2 q вҗӨ2 xi , вҗІ3ЕҪ xi.

using xi scores Г„0, 62.5, 125, 250, 5004 for concentration level. The ML esti-
mates are вҗӨЛҶ1 s 0.0064 ЕҪSE s 0.0004. and вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.0174 ЕҪSE s 0.0012.. In
each case, the less desirable outcome is more likely as the concentration
increases. For instance, given that a fetus was live, the estimated odds that it was malformed rather than normal multiplies by expЕҪ1.74. s 5.7 for every
100-unit increase in the concentration of diEGdiME. The likelihood-ratio fit

TABLE 7.9 Outcomes for Pregnant Mice in Developmental Toxicity Study

Concentration ЕҪmgrkg per day.

Nonlive

Response Malformation

Normal

0 ЕҪcontrols.

15

1

281

62.5

17

0

225

125

22

7

283

250

38

59

202

500

144

132

9

aBased on results in C. J. Price et al., Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 8:115бҺҗ126 ЕҪ1987.. I thank Louise Ryan for showing me these data.

ALTERNATIVE MODELS FOR ORDINAL RESPONSES

291

statistics are G2 s 5.78 for j s 1 and G2 s 6.06 for j s 2, each based on df s 3. Their sum, G2 s 11.84 ЕҪor similarly X 2 s 9.76., with df s 6, summarizes the fit.
This analysis treats pregnancy outcomes for different fetuses as independent, identical observations. In fact, each pregnant mouse had a litter of fetuses, and statistical dependence may exist among different fetuses in the same litter. Different litters at a given concentration level may also have different response probabilities. Heterogeneity of various sorts among the litters ЕҪe.g., due to varying physical characteristics among different pregnant mice. would cause these probabilities to vary somewhat. Either statistical dependence or heterogeneous probabilities violates the binomial assumption and causes overdispersion. At a fixed concentration level, the number of fetuses in a litter that die may vary among pregnant mice more than if the counts were independent and identical binomial variates. The total G2 shows some evidence of lack of fit ЕҪ P s 0.07. but may reflect overdispersion caused by these factors rather than an inappropriate choice of response curve.
To account for overdispersion, we could adjust standard errors using the quasi-likelihood approach ЕҪSection 4.7.. This multiplies standard errors by
'X 2rdf s '9.76r6 s 1.28. For each logit, strong evidence remains that
вҗӨj ) 0. In Chapters 12 and 13 we present other methods that account for the clustering of fetuses in litters.

7.4.5 Mean Response Models for Ordered Response
We now present a model that resembles ordinary regression for a continuous response variable. For scores В®1 F В®2 F РёРёРё F В®J , let
M ЕҪx. s Гқ В®jвҗІj ЕҪx.
j

denote the mean response. The model
M ЕҪx. s вҗЈ q вҗӨX x

ЕҪ 7 .16.

assumes a linear relationship between the mean and the explanatory variables. With J s 2, it is the linear probability model ЕҪSection 4.2.1.. With J ) 2, it does not structurally specify the response probabilities but merely describes the dependence of the mean on x.
Assuming independent multinomial sampling at different x i, Bhapkar ЕҪ1968., Grizzle et al. ЕҪ1969., and Williams and Grizzle ЕҪ1972. presented weighted least squares ЕҪWLS. fits for mean response models. The WLS approach, described in Section 15.1, applies when all explanatory variables are categorical. The ML approach for maximizing the product multinomial likelihood applies for categorical or continuous explanatory variables. Haber ЕҪ1985. and Lipsitz ЕҪ1992. presented algorithms for ML fitting of a family,

292

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

including mean response models. This is somewhat complex, since the probabilities in the multinomial likelihood are not direct functions of the parameters in ЕҪ7.16.. Specialized software is available ЕҪsee Appendix A..

7.4.6 Job Satisfaction Example Revisited
We illustrate for Table 7.8, modeling the mean of Y s job satisfaction using income x and gender g ЕҪ1 s females, 0 s males.. For simplicity, we use job satisfaction scores and income scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4.. The model has ML fit,
MЛҶ s 2.59 q 0.181 x y 0.030 g ,
with SE s 0.069 for income and 0.145 for gender. Given gender, the estimated increase in mean job satisfaction is about 0.2 response category for each category increase of income. Although the evidence is strong of a positive effect we.g., Wald statistic ЕҪ0.181r0.069.2 s 6.8, df s 1, P s 0.009x, the strength of the effect is weak. Job satisfaction at the highest income level is estimated to average about half a category higher than at the lowest income level, since 3ЕҪ0.181. s 0.54. Similar results occur with the WLS solution, for which the estimated income effect of 0.182 has SE s 0.068 ЕҪTable A.12 shows the use of CATMOD in SAS..
The deviance for testing the model fit equals 5.1. Since means occur at eight income = gender settings and the model has three parameters, residual df s 5. The fit seems adequate.

7.4.7 Advantages and Disadvantages of Mean Response Models

Treating ordinal variables in a quantitative manner is sensible if their categorical nature reflects crude measurement of an inherently continuous variable. Mean response models have the advantage of closely resembling ordinary regression.
With J s 2, in Section 4.2.1 we noted that linear probability models have a structural difficulty because of the restriction of probabilities to ЕҪ0, 1.. A similar difficulty occurs here, since a linear model can have predicted means outside the range of assigned scores. This happens less frequently when J is large and reasonable dispersion of responses occurs throughout the domain of interest for the explanatory variables. The notion of an underlying latent variable makes more sense for an ordinal variable than for a strictly binary response, so this difficulty has less relevance here.
Unlike logit models, mean response models do not uniquely determine cell probabilities. Thus, mean response models do not specify structural aspects such as stochastic orderings. These models do not represent the categorical response structure as fully as do models for probabilities, and conditions such as independence do not occur as special cases. However, they provide simpler descriptions than odds ratios or summaries from cumulative link

TESTING CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE IN I = J = K TABLES

293

models. As J increases, they also interface with ordinary regression models. For large J, they are a simple mechanism for approximating results for a regression model we would use if we could measure Y continuously.

7.5 TESTING CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE IN I = J = K TABLES*
In Section 6.3.2 we introduced the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel ЕҪCMH. test of conditional independence for 2 = 2 = K tables. This section presents related tests with multicategory responses for I = J = K tables. Likelihood-ratio tests compare the fit of a model specifying XY conditional independence with a model having dependence. Alternatively, generalizations of the CMH statistic are score statistics for certain models.

7.5.1 Using Multinomial Models to Test Conditional Independence
Treating Z as a nominal control factor, we discuss four cases with ЕҪY, X . as ЕҪordinal, ordinal., ЕҪordinal, nominal., ЕҪnominal, ordinal., ЕҪnominal, nominal.. For ordinal Y we use cumulative logit models, but other ordinal links yield analogous tests. As we noted in Section 6.3.2 when the XY association is similar in the partial tables, the power benefits from basing a test statistic on a model of homogeneous association.

1. Y ordinal, X ordinal. Let Г„ xi4 be ordered scores. The model
logit P ЕҪ Y F j < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ xi q вҗӨkZ

ЕҪ 7 .17.

has the same linear trend for the X effect in each partial table. For it, XY conditional independence is H0: вҗӨ s 0. Likelihood-ratio, score, or Wald statistics for H0 provide large-sample chi-squared tests with df s 1 that are sensitive to the trend alternative.
2. Y ordinal, X nominal. An alternative to conditional independence that treats X as a factor is
logit P ЕҪ Y F j < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈj q вҗӨi q вҗӨkZ ,

with constraint such as вҗӨI s 0. For this model, XY conditional independence is H0: вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨI. Large-sample chi-squared tests have df s I y 1.

3. Y nominal, X ordinal. When Y is nominal, analogous tests use baseline-category logit models. The model of XY conditional independence is

PЕҪY s j < X s i, Z s k. log P ЕҪ Y s J < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈjk .

ЕҪ 7 .18.

294

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

For ordered scores Г„ xi4, a test that is sensitive to the same linear trend alternatives in each partial table compares this model to

PЕҪY s j < X s i, Z s k. log P ЕҪ Y s J < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈjk q вҗӨj xi .

Conditional independence is H0: вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨJy1 s 0. Large-sample chi-squared tests have df s J y 1.
4. Y nominal, X nominal. An alternative to XY conditional independence that treats X as a factor is

PЕҪY s j < X s i, Z s k. log P ЕҪ Y s J < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈjk q вҗӨi j

ЕҪ 7 .19.

with constraint such as вҗӨIj s 0 for each j. For each j, X and Z have additive effects of form вҗЈk q вҗӨi. Conditional independence is H0: вҗӨ1 j s РёРёРё s вҗӨIj for j s 1, . . . , J y 1. Large-sample chi-squared tests have df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1..
Table 7.10 summarizes the four tests. They work well when the model describes at least a major component of the departure from conditional independence. This does not mean that one must test the fit of the model to use the test ЕҪsee the remarks at the end of Section 6.3.2..
Occasionally, the association may change dramatically across the K partial tables. When Z is ordinal, an alternative by which a log odds ratio changes linearly across levels of Z is sometimes of use. For instance, when Z s age of subject, the association between a risk factor X ЕҪe.g., level of smoking. and a response Y ЕҪe.g., severity of heart disease. may tend to increase with Z. When Z is nominal, one can test the conditional independence models

TABLE 7.10 Summary of Models for Testing Conditional Independence

Y-X Ord-Ord
-Nom
Nom-Ord

Model

logitw

P

ЕҪ

Y

F

j

.x

s

вҗЈ

j

q

вҗӨ

x

i

q

вҗӨ

Z k

logitw

P

ЕҪ

Y

F

j

.x

s

вҗЈ

j

q

вҗӨi

q

вҗӨ

Z k

PЕҪY s j. log P ЕҪY s J .

s вҗЈjk q вҗӨj xi

Conditional Independence
вҗӨs0 вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨI
вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨJy1 s 0

df 1 Iy1
Jy1

-Nom

PЕҪY s j. log P ЕҪY s J .

s вҗЈjk q вҗӨi j

all вҗӨi j s 0

ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.

TESTING CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE IN I = J = K TABLES

295

against a more general alternative with separate effect parameters at each level of Z. Allowing effects to vary across levels of Z, however, results in the test df being multiplied by K, which handicaps power.

7.5.2 Job Satisfaction Example Revisited
We now revisit the job satisfaction data ЕҪTable 7.8.. Table 7.11 summarizes the fit of several models. The model treating income as an ordinal predictor uses scores Г„3, 10, 20, 354, approximate midpoints of categories in thousands of dollars. Each likelihood-ratio test compares a given model to the model deleting the income effect, controlling for gender.
Testing conditional independence with the cumulative logit model ЕҪ7.17. yields likelihood-ratio statistic 19.62 y 13.95 s 5.7 with df s 20 y 19 s 1, strong evidence of an effect. Models that treat either or both variables as nominal do not provide such strong evidence. Focusing the test on a linear trend alternative yields a smaller P-value. However, we learn more from estimating parameters than from significance tests, as in Sections 7.4.2 and 7.4.6.

7.5.3 Generalized CochranвҖ“MantelбҺҗHaenszel Tests for I = J = K Tables Birch ЕҪ1965., Landis et al. ЕҪ1978., and Mantel and Byar ЕҪ1978. generalized the CMH statistic ЕҪSection 6.3.2.. The tests treat X and Y symmetrically, so the three cases correspond to treating both as nominal, both as ordinal, or one of each. Conditional on row and column totals, each stratum has ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. nonredundant cell counts. Let
n k s ЕҪ n11 k , n12 k , . . . , n1, Jy1 ,k , . . . , nIy1 , Jy1 ,k .X .

TABLE 7.11 Summary of Model-Based Likelihood-Ratio Tests of Conditional Independence for Table 7.8

Satisfaction

Income

Test G2 Fit df Statistic df

Ordinal Nominal

Ordinal

13.95

19

Nominal

10.51

17

Not in model

19.62

20

5.7

1

9.1

3

бҺҸ

бҺҸ

Ordinal

11.74

15

7.6

3

Nominal

7.09

9

12.3

9

Not in model

19.37

18

бҺҸ

бҺҸ

P-value
0.017 0.028
бҺҸ
0.054 0.198
бҺҸ

296

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

Let вҗ®k s EЕҪn k . under H0: conditional independence, namely
вҗ® k s ЕҪ n1qk nq1 k , n1qk nq2 k , . . . , nIy1 ,q,k nq, Jy1 ,k .Xrnqqk .

Let Vk denote the null covariance matrix of n k , where
covЕҪ ni jk , niX jX k . s 2 niqk ЕҪ вҗҰiiX nqqk y niXqk . nqj k ЕҪ вҗҰj jX nqqk y nqjX k .
nqqk ЕҪ nqqk y 1.

with вҗҰab s 1 when a s b and вҗҰab s 0 otherwise. The most general statistic treats rows and columns as unordered. Sum-
ming over the K strata, let
n s Гқ n k , вҗ® s Гқ вҗ®k , V s Гқ Vk .

The generalized CMH statistic for nominal X and Y is

CMH s ЕҪn y вҗ®.XVy1 ЕҪn y вҗ®. .

ЕҪ 7 .20.

Its large-sample chi-squared distribution has df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. The df value equals that for the statistics comparing logit models ЕҪ7.18. and ЕҪ7.19..
Both statistics are sensitive to detecting a conditional association that is
similar in each stratum. For K s 1 stratum with n observations, CMH s wЕҪ n y 1.rnx X 2, where X 2 is the Pearson statistic ЕҪ3.10..
Mantel ЕҪ1963. introduced a generalized statistic for ordinal X and Y. Using ordered scores Г„ui4 and Г„В®j4, it is sensitive to a correlation of common sign in each stratum. Evidence of a positive trend occurs if in each stratum Tk s ГқiГқj uiВ®j ni jk exceeds its null expectation. Given the marginal totals in each stratum, under conditional independence

EЕҪ Tk . s Гқ ui niqk
i

Гқ В®j nqj k
j

nqqk ,

var ЕҪ Tk . s 1
nqqk y 1

2 ЕҪ Гқi ui niqk . 2
Гқ ui niqk y

i

nqqk

2 ЕҪГқ jВ®j nqj k .2

= Гқ В®j nqjk y

.

j

nqqk

The statistic wTk y EЕҪTk .xrwvarЕҪTk .x1r2 equals the correlation between X and
Y in stratum k multiplied by 'nqqk y 1 . To summarize across the K strata,

TESTING CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE IN I = J = K TABLES

297

Mantel ЕҪ1963. proposed
2 Г„Гқk ГқiГқj uiВ®j ni jk y E ЕҪГқiГқj uiВ®j ni jk . 42
M s ГқkvarЕҪГқiГқj uiВ®j ni jk . .

ЕҪ 7 .21.

This has an approximate вҗ№12 null distribution, the same as for testing H0: вҗӨ s 0 in ordinal model ЕҪ7.17.. For K s 1, this is the M 2 statistic ЕҪ3.15..
Landis et al. ЕҪ1978. presented a statistic that has ЕҪ7.20. and ЕҪ7.21. as special cases. His statistic also can treat X as nominal and Y as ordinal, summarizing information about how I row means compare to their null expected values, with df s I y 1 ЕҪsee Note 7.7..

7.5.4 Job Satisfaction Example Revisited
Table 7.12 shows output from conducting generalized CMH tests for Table 7.8. Statistics treating a variable as ordinal used scores Г„3, 10, 20, 354 for income and scores Г„1, 3, 4, 54 for job satisfaction. ЕҪTable A.12 shows the use of PROC FREQ in SAS, but with different scores.
The general association alternative treats X and Y as nominal and uses ЕҪ7.20.. It is sensitive to any association that is similar in each level of Z. The row mean scores differ alternative treats rows as nominal and columns as ordinal. It is sensitive to variation among the I row mean scores on Y, when that variation is similar in each level of Z. Finally, the nonzero correlation alternative treats X and Y as ordinal and uses ЕҪ7.21.. It is sensitive to a similar linear trend in each level of Z. As in the model-based analyses that Table 7.11 summarized, the evidence is stronger using the df s 1 ordinal test.

7.5.5 Related Score Tests for Multinomial Logit Models
The generalized CMH tests seem to be non-model-based alternatives to those of Section 7.5.1 using multinomial logit models. However, a close connection exists between them. For various multinomial logit models, the generalized CMH tests are score tests.

TABLE 7.12 Output for Generalized CochranвҖ“MantelвҖ“Haenszel Tests with Job Satisfaction and Income Data

Summary Statistics for income by satisf Controlling for gender

Cochran- Mantel- Haenszel Statistics (Based on Table Scores)

Statistic

Alternative Hypothesis

DF

Value

Prob

1

Nonzero Correlation

1

6.1563

0.0131

2

Row Mean Scores Differ

3

9.0342

0.0288

3

General Association

9

10.2001

0.3345

298

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

The generalized CMH test ЕҪ7.20. that treats X and Y as nominal is the score test that the ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.Г„ вҗӨi j4 parameters in logit model ЕҪ7.19. equal 0. The generalized CMH test using M 2 that treats X and Y as ordinal is the score test of вҗӨ s 0 in model ЕҪ7.17.. For the cumulative logit model, the equivalence has the same Г„ xi4 scores in the model as in M 2, and the Г„В®j4 scores in M 2 are average rank scores. For the adjacent-categories logit model analog of ЕҪ7.17., the Г„В®j4 scores in M 2 are any equally spaced scores.
With large samples in each stratum, the generalized CMH tests give similar results as likelihood-ratio tests comparing the relevant models. An advantage of the model-based approach is providing estimates of effects. An advantage of the generalized CMH tests is maintaining good performance under sparse asymptotics whereby K grows as n does. Remarks in Section 6.3.4 apply here also.

7.5.6 Exact Tests of Conditional Independence
In principle, exact tests of conditional independence can use the generalized CMH statistics, generalizing Section 6.7.5 for 2 = 2 = K tables. To eliminate nuisance parameters, one conditions on row and column totals in each stratum. The distribution of counts in each stratum is the multiple hypergeometric ЕҪSection 3.5.7., and this propagates an exact conditional distribution for the statistic of interest. The P-value is the probability of those tables having the same strata margins as observed but test statistic at least as large as observed ЕҪsee Birch 1965; Kim and Agresti 1997; Mehta et al. 1988..

7.6 DISCRETE-CHOICE MULTINOMIAL LOGIT MODELS*
An important application of multinomial logit models is determining effects of explanatory variables on a subjectвҖҷs choice from a discrete set of optionsбҺҸfor instance, the choice of transportation system to take to work ЕҪdrive, bus, subway, walk, bicycle., housing ЕҪbuy house, buy condominium, rent., primary shopping location ЕҪdowntown, mall, catalogs, Internet., or product brand. Models for response variables consisting of a discrete set of choices are called discrete-choice models.
7.6.1 Discrete-Choice Modeling
In many discrete-choice applications, an explanatory variable takes different values for different response choices. As predictors of choice of transportation system, cost and time to reach destination take different values for each option. As a predictor of choice of product brand, price varies according to the option. Explanatory variables of this type are characteristics of the choices. They differ from the usual ones, for which values remain constant across the choice set. Such variables, characteristics of the chooser, include income, education, and other demographic characteristics.

DISCRETE-CHOICE MULTINOMIAL LOGIT MODELS

299

McFadden ЕҪ1974. proposed a discrete-choice model for explanatory variables that are characteristics of the choices. His model also permits the choice set to vary among subjects. For instance, some subjects may not have the subway as an option for travel to work. For subject i and response choice j, let x i j s ЕҪ xi j1, . . . , xi j p.X denote the values of the p explanatory variables, and let x i s ЕҪx i1, . . . , x i p.. Conditional on the choice set Ci for subject i, the model for the probability of selecting option j is

X
expЕҪвҗӨ x i j .

вҗІjЕҪxi. s

X

.

Гқhg CiexpЕҪ вҗӨ x ih .

ЕҪ 7 .22.

For each pair of choices a and b, this model has the logit form
X
log вҗІaЕҪx i . rвҗІ b ЕҪx i . s вҗӨ ЕҪx ia y x ib . .

ЕҪ 7 .23.

Conditional on the choice being a or b, a variableвҖҷs influence depends on the distance between the subjectвҖҷs values of that variable for those choices. If the values are the same, the model asserts that the variable has no influence on the choice between a and b. Reflecting this property, McFadden originally referred to model ЕҪ7.22. as a conditional logit model.
From ЕҪ7.23., the odds of choosing a over b do not depend on the other alternatives in the choice set or on their values of the explanatory variables. Luce ЕҪ1959. called this property independence from irreleВ®ant alternatiВ®es. It is unrealistic in some applications. For instance, for travel options auto and red bus, suppose that 80% choose auto, an odds of 4.0. Now suppose that the options are auto, red bus, and blue bus. According to ЕҪ7.23., the odds are still 4.0 of choosing auto instead of red bus, but intuitively, we expect them to be about 8.0 ЕҪ10% choosing each bus option., McFadden ЕҪ1974. stated: вҖҳвҖҳApplication of the model should be limited to situations where the alternatives can plausibly be assumed to be distinct and weighed independently in the eyes of each decision-maker.вҖҷвҖҷ

7.6.2 Discrete-Choice and Multinomial Logit Models
Model ЕҪ7.22. can also incorporate explanatory variables that are characteristics of the chooser. This may seem surprising, since ЕҪ7.22. has a single parameter for each explanatory variable; that is, the parameter vector is the same for each pair of choices. However, multinomial logit model ЕҪ7.2. has discrete-choice form ЕҪ7.22. after replacing such an explanatory variable by J artificial variables; the jth is the product of the explanatory variable with a dummy variable that equals 1 when the response choice is j. For instance, for a single explanatory variable, let xi denote its value for subject i. For j s 1, . . . , J, let вҗҰjk equal 1 when k s j and 0 otherwise, and let
z i j s ЕҪ вҗҰj1 , . . . , вҗҰjJ ,вҗҰj1 xi , . . . , вҗҰjJ xi .X .

300

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

Let

вҗӨ s ЕҪвҗЈ1, . . . , вҗЈ J ,вҗӨ1, . . . , вҗӨJ .X.

Then

X
вҗӨ zij s вҗЈj q вҗӨj xi,

and

ЕҪ7.2.

is

ЕҪwith

вҗЈ J s вҗӨJ s 0 for identifiability.

вҗІjЕҪ xi. s

expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨj xi .

expЕҪвҗЈ1 q вҗӨ1 xi . q РёРёРё qexpЕҪвҗЈJ q вҗӨJ xi .

X

expЕҪвҗӨ z i j .

s

X

X

.

expЕҪ вҗӨ z i1 . q РёРёРё qexpЕҪ вҗӨ z i J .

This has form ЕҪ7.22.. With this approach, discrete-choice models can contain characteristics of
the chooser and the choices. Thus, model ЕҪ7.22. is very general. The ordinary multinomial logit model ЕҪ7.2. using baseline-category logits is a special case.

7.6.3 Shopping Choice Example McFadden ЕҪ1974. used multinomial logit models to describe how residents of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania chose a shopping destination. The five possible destinations were different city zones. One explanatory variable measured shopping opportunities, defined to be the retail employment in the zone as a percentage of total retail employment in the region. The other explanatory variable was price of the trip, defined from a separate analysis using auto in-vehicle time and auto operating cost.
The ML estimates of model parameters were y1.06 ЕҪSE s 0.28. for price of trip and 0.84 ЕҪSE s 0.23. for shopping opportunity. From ЕҪ7.23.,
logЕҪвҗІЛҶarвҗІЛҶ b . s y1.06ЕҪ Pa y Pb . q 0.84ЕҪ Sa y Sb . ,
where P s price and S s shopping opportunity. Not surprisingly, a destination is relatively more attractive as the trip price decreases and as the shopping opportunity increases. Given values of P and S for each destination, the sample analog of ЕҪ7.22. provides estimated probabilities of choosing each destination.

NOTES
Section 7.1: Nominal Responses: Baseline-Category Logit Models
7.1. Multicategory models derive from latent variable constructions that generalize those for binary responses. One approach uses the principle of selecting the category having maximum utility ЕҪProblem 6.29.. Fahrmeir and Tutz ЕҪ2001, Chap. 3. gave discussion and references. Baseline-category logit models were developed in Bock ЕҪ1970., Haberman ЕҪ1974a, pp. 352бҺҗ373., Mantel ЕҪ1966., Nerlove and Press ЕҪ1973., and Theil ЕҪ1969, 1970.. Lesaffre and Albert ЕҪ1989. presented regression diagnostics. Amemiya ЕҪ1981., Haberman ЕҪ1982., and Theil ЕҪ1970. presented R-squared measures.

NOTES

301

Section 7.2: Ordinal Responses: CumulatiВ©e Logit Models

7.2. Early uses of cumulative logit models include Bock and Jones ЕҪ1968., Simon ЕҪ1974., Snell ЕҪ1964., Walker and Duncan ЕҪ1967., and Williams and Grizzle ЕҪ1972.. McCullagh ЕҪ1980. popularized the proportional odds case. Later articles include Agresti and Lang ЕҪ1993a., Hastie and Tibshirani ЕҪ1987., Peterson and Harrell ЕҪ1990., and Tutz ЕҪ1989.. See also Section 11.3.3, Note 11.3, and Section 12.4.1. McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989, Sec. 5.6. suggested using cumulative totals in forming residuals.
7.3. McCullagh ЕҪ1980. noted that score tests for model ЕҪ7.5. are equivalent to nonparametric tests using average ranks. For instance, for 2 = J tables assume that logit w PЕҪY F j.x s вҗЈj q вҗӨ x, with x an indicator. The score test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 is equivalent to a discrete version of the WilcoxonбҺҗMannбҺҗWhitney test. Whitehead ЕҪ1993. gave sample size formulas for this case. The sample size nJ needed for a certain power decreases as J increases: When response categories have equal probabilities, n J f 0.75n2rЕҪ1 y 1rJ 2 .. Thus, for large J, nJ f 0.75n2 , and 1 y 1rJ 2 is a type of efficiency measure of using J categories instead of a continuous response. The efficiency loss is minor with J f 5, but major in collapsing to J s 2. Edwardes ЕҪ1997. innovatively adapted the test by treating the cutpoints as random. This relates to random effects models of Section 12.4.1.

Section 7.3: Ordinal Responses: CumulatiВ©e Link Models
7.4. Aitchison and Silvey ЕҪ1957. and Bock and Jones ЕҪ1968, Chap. 8. studied cumulative probit models. Farewell ЕҪ1982. generalized the complementary log-log model to allow variation among the sample in the category boundaries for the underlying scale; this relates to random effects models ЕҪSection 12.4.. Genter and Farewell ЕҪ1985. introduced a generalized link function that permits comparison of fits provided by probit, complementary log-log, and other links. Yee and Wild ЕҪ1996. defined generalized additive models for nominal and ordinal responses. Hamada and Wu ЕҪ1990. and Nair ЕҪ1987. presented alternatives to model ЕҪ7.8. for detecting dispersion effects.
7.5. Some authors have considered inference relating generally to stochastic ordering; see, for instance, Dardanoni and Forcina ЕҪ1998. and survey articles in a 2002 issue of J. Statist. Plann. Inference ЕҪVol. 107, Nos. 1бҺҗ2..

Section 7.4: AlternatiВ©e Models for Ordinal Responses
7.6. The ratio of a pdf to the complement of the cdf is the hazard function ЕҪSection 9.7.3.. For discrete variables, this is the ratio found in continuation-ratio logits. Hence, continuation-ratio logits are sometimes interpreted as log hazards. Thompson ЕҪ1977. used them in modeling discrete survival-time data. When lengths of time intervals approach 0, his model converges to the Cox proportional hazards model. Other applica-
tions of continuation-ratio logits include LВЁaВЁarВЁa and Matthews ЕҪ1985. and Tutz ЕҪ1991..
Section 7.5: Testing Conditional Independence in I = J = K Tables
7.7. Let Bk s u k m vk denote a matrix of constants based on row scores u k and column scores vk for stratum k, where m denotes the Kronecker product. The Landis et al.

302

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

ЕҪ1978. generalized statistic is

X

y1

L2 s Гқ Bk ЕҪn k y вҗ®k . Гқ BkVk BkX

Гқ BkЕҪnk y вҗ®k . .

k

k

k

When u k s ЕҪu1, . . . , uI . and vk s ЕҪ В®1, . . . , В®J . for all strata, L2 s M 2. When u k is an

ЕҪ I y 1. = I matrix ЕҪI, y1., where I is an identity matrix of size ЕҪ I y 1. and 1 denotes a

column vector of I y 1 ones, and vk is the analogous matrix of size ЕҪ J y 1. = J, L2

simplifies to ЕҪ7.20. with df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. With this u k and vk s ЕҪ В®1, . . . , В®J ., L2 sums

over the strata information about how I row means compare to their null expected

values, and it has df s I y 1. Rank score versions are analogs for ordered categorical

responses of strata-adjusted Spearman correlation and KruskalбҺҗWallis tests. Landis et al. ЕҪ1998. and Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000. reviewed CMH methods. Koch et al. ЕҪ1982. reviewed

related methods.

Section 7.6: Discrete-Choice Multinomial Logit Models
7.8. McFaddenвҖҷs model relates to models proposed by Bradley and Terry ЕҪ1952. ЕҪsee Section 10.6. and Luce ЕҪ1959.. See Train ЕҪ1986. for a text treatment. McFadden ЕҪ1982. discussed hierarchical models having a nesting of choices in a tree-like structure. For other discussion, see Maddala ЕҪ1983. and Small ЕҪ1987.. Models that do not assume independence from irrelevant alternatives result with probit link ЕҪAmemiya 1981. or with the logit link but including random effects ЕҪBrownstone and Train 1999.. Methods in Section 12.6 for random effects models are useful for fitting such models. These include Monte Carlo methods for approximating integrals that determine the likelihood function. See Stern ЕҪ1997. for a review.

PROBLEMS
Applications
7.1 For Table 7.13, let Y s belief in life after death, x1 s gender ЕҪ1 s females, 0 s males., and x2 s race ЕҪ1 s whites, 0 s blacks.. Table 7.14 shows the fit of the model
logЕҪвҗІ jrвҗІ 3 . s вҗЈj q вҗӨjG x1 q вҗӨjR x2 , j s 1, 2,
with SE values in parentheses.

TABLE 7.13 Data for Problem 7.1

Race

Gender

Belief in Afterlife Yes Undecided No

White

Female

371

49

74

Male

250

45

71

Black

Female

64

Male

25

9

15

5

13

Source: 1991 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

PROBLEMS

303

TABLE 7.14
Parameter Intercept Gender Race

Fit of Model for Problem 7.1

Belief Categories for Logit

YesrNo 0.883 ЕҪ0.243. 0.419 ЕҪ0.171. 0.342 ЕҪ0.237.

UndecidedrNo y0.758 ЕҪ0.361.
0.105 ЕҪ0.246. 0.271 ЕҪ0.354.

a. Find the prediction equation for logЕҪвҗІ 1rвҗІ 2 .. b. Using the yes and no response categories, interpret the conditional
gender effect using a 95% confidence interval for an odds ratio.
c. Show that for white females, вҗІЛҶ 1 s PЛҶЕҪY s yes. s 0.76.
d. Without calculating estimated probabilities, explain why the inter-
cept estimates indicate that for black males вҗІЛҶ 1 ) вҗІЛҶ 3 ) вҗІЛҶ 2. Use
the intercept and gender estimates to show that the same ordering applies for black females.
e. Without calculating estimated probabilities, explain why the esti-
mates in the gender and race rows indicate that вҗІЛҶ 3 is highest for
black males. f. For this fit, G2 s 0.9. Explain why residual df s 2. Deleting the
gender effect, G2 s 8.0. Test whether opinion is independent of gender, given race. Interpret.
7.2 A model fit predicting preference for U.S. President ЕҪDemocrat, Republican, Independent. using x s annual income ЕҪin $10,000. is
logЕҪвҗІЛҶDrвҗІЛҶI . s 3.3 y 0.2 x and logЕҪвҗІЛҶRrвҗІЛҶI . s 1.0 q 0.3 x. a. Find the prediction equation for logЕҪвҗІЛҶRrвҗІЛҶD. and interpret the
slope. For what range of x is вҗІЛҶR ) вҗІЛҶD? b. Find the prediction equation for вҗІЛҶI. c. Plot вҗІЛҶD, вҗІЛҶI , and вҗІЛҶR for x between 0 and 10, and interpret.
7.3 Table 7.15 refers to the effect on political party identification of gender and race. Find a baseline-category logit model that fits well.

TABLE 7.15 Data for Problem 7.3

Gender Male
Female

Race
White Black White Black

Democrat
132 42 172 56

Party Identification
Republican
176 6
129 4

Independent
127 12 130 15

304

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

Interpret estimated effects on the odds that party identification is Democrat instead of Republican.

TABLE 7.16 Data for Problem 7.4 a

Males

Length Choice ЕҪm.

Length ЕҪm.

Choice

1.30

I

1.80

F

1.32

F

1.85

F

1.32

F

1.93

I

1.40

F

1.93

F

1.42

I

1.98

I

1.42

F

2.03

F

1.47

I

2.03

F

1.47

F

2.31

F

1.50

I

2.36

F

1.52

I

2.46

F

1.63

I

3.25

O

1.65

O

3.28

O

1.65

O

3.33

F

1.65

I

3.56

F

1.65

F

3.58

F

1.68

F

3.66

F

1.70

I

3.68

O

1.73

O

3.71

F

1.78

F

3.89

F

1.78

O

aI, invertebrates; F, fish; O, other.

Length ЕҪm.
1.24 1.30 1.45 1.45 1.55 1.60 1.60 1.65 1.78 1.78 1.80 1.88 2.16 2.26 2.31 2.36 2.39 2.41 2.44

Females

Choice

Length ЕҪm.

I

2.56

I

2.67

I

2.72

O

2.79

I

2.84

I

I

F

I

O

I

I

F

F

F

F

F

F

F

Choice
O F I F F

7.4 For 63 alligators caught in Lake George, Florida, Table 7.16 classifies primary food choice as ЕҪfish, invertebrate, other. and shows length in meters. Alligators are called subadults if length - 1.83 meters ЕҪ6 feet. and adults if length ) 1.83 meters. a. Measuring length as ЕҪadult, subadult., find a model that adequately describes effects of gender and length on food choice. Interpret the effects. For adult females, find the estimated probabilities of the food-choice categories.
b. Using only observations for which primary food choice was fish or invertebrate, find a model that adequately describes effects of gender and binary length. Compare parameter estimates and standard errors for this separate-fitting approach to those obtained with simultaneous fitting, including the other category.
c. Treating length as binary loses information. Adapt the model in part ЕҪa. to use the continuous measurements. Interpret, explaining how the estimated outcome probabilities vary with length. Find the

PROBLEMS

305

estimated length at which the invertebrate and other categories are equally likely.

7.5 For recent data from a General Social Survey, the cumulative logit model ЕҪ7.5. with Y s political ideology ЕҪvery liberal, slightly liberal, moderate, slightly conservative, very conservative. and x s 1 for the
428 Democrats and x s 0 for the 407 Republicans has вҗӨЛҶs 0.975 ЕҪSE s 0.129. and вҗЈЛҶ1 s y2.469. Interpret вҗӨЛҶ. Find the estimated prob-
ability of a very liberal response for each group.
7.6 Refer to Problem 7.5. With adjacent-categories logits, вҗӨЛҶs 0.435. In-
terpret using odds ratios for adjacent categories and for the ЕҪvery liberal, very conservative. pair of categories.

7.7 Table 7.17 is an expanded version of a data set analyzed in Section 8.4.2. The response categories are ЕҪ1. not injured, ЕҪ2. injured but not transported by emergency medical services, ЕҪ3. injured and transported by emergency medical services but not hospitalized, ЕҪ4. injured and hospitalized but did not die, and ЕҪ5. injured and died. Table 7.18 shows output for a model of form ЕҪ7.5., using dummy variables for predictors.
a. Why are there four intercepts? Explain how they determine the estimated response distribution for males in urban areas wearing seat belts.
b. Construct a confidence interval for the effect of gender, given seat-belt use and location. Interpret.
c. Find the estimated cumulative odds ratio between the response and seat-belt use for those in rural locations and for those in urban locations, given gender. Based on this, explain how the effect of seat-belt use varies by region, and explain how to interpret the interaction estimate, y0.1244.

TABLE 7.17 Data for Problem 7.7

Response

Gender

Location

Seat Belt

1

2

3

4

5

Female Male

Urban Rural Urban Rural

No

7,287 175 720

91 10

Yes

11,587 126 577

48

8

No

3,246

73 710 159 31

Yes

6,134

94 564

82 17

No

10,381 136 566

96 14

Yes

10,969

83 259

37

1

No

6,123 141 710 188 45

Yes

6,693

74 353

74 12

Source: Data courtesy of Cristanna Cook, Medical Care Development, Augusta, Maine.

306

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

TABLE 7.18 Output for Problem 7.7

Parameter

DF

Estimate

Std Error

Intercept1

1

3.3074

0.0351

Intercept2

1

3.4818

0.0355

Intercept3

1

5.3494

0.0470

Intercept4

1

7.2563

0.0914

gender

female

1

y0.5463

0.0272

gender

male

0

0.0000

0.0000

location

rural

1

y0.6988

0.0424

location

urban

0

0.0000

0.0000

seatbelt

no

1

y0.7602

0.0393

seatbelt

yes

0

0.0000

0.0000

location*seatbelt

rural

no

1

y0.1244

0.0548

location*seatbelt

rural

yes

0

0.0000

0.0000

location*seatbelt

urban

no

0

0.0000

0.0000

location*seatbelt

urban

yes

0

0.0000

0.0000

7.8 Refer to the cumulative logit model for Table 7.8.
a. Compare the estimated income effect вҗӨЛҶ1 s y0.510 to the estimate
after collapsing the response to three categories by combining categories ЕҪi. very satisfied and moderately satisfied, and ЕҪii. very dissatisfied and a little satisfied. What property of the model does this reflect?
b. Consider вҗӨЛҶ1rSE using the full scale to вҗӨЛҶ1rSE for the collapsing in
part ЕҪaЕҪi... Usually, a disadvantage of collapsing multinomial responses is that the significance of effects diminishes.
c. Check whether an improved model results from permitting interaction between income and gender. Interpret.
7.9 Table 7.19 refers to a clinical trial for the treatment of small-cell lung cancer. Patients were randomly assigned to two treatment groups. The sequential therapy administered the same combination of chemotherapeutic agents in each treatment cycle; the alternating therapy had three different combinations, alternating from cycle to cycle.

TABLE 7.19 Data for Problem 7.9

Therapy

Gender

Progressive Disease

Response to Chemotherapy

No Change

Partial Remission

Sequential Male

28

Female

4

45

29

12

5

Alternating Male

41

Female

12

44

20

7

3

Source: W. Holtbrugge and M. Schumacher, Appl. Statist. 40: 249бҺҗ259 ЕҪ1991..

Complete Remission
26 2
20 1

PROBLEMS

307

a. Fit a cumulative logit model with main effects for treatment and gender. Interpret.
b. Fit the model that also contains an interaction term. Interpret. Does it fit better? Explain why it is equivalent to using the four genderбҺҗtreatment combinations as levels of a single factor.

7.10 Refer to Table 7.13. Treating belief in an afterlife as ordinal, fit and interpret an ordinal model.
7.11 Table 9.7 displays associations among smoking status ЕҪS., breathing test results ЕҪ B., and age ЕҪ A. for workers in certain industrial plants. Treat B as a response. a. Specify a baseline-category logit model with additive factor effects of S and A. This model has deviance G2 s 25.9. Show that df s 4, and explain why this model treats all variables as nominal. b. Treat B as ordinal and S as ordinal in terms of how recently one was a smoker, with scores Г„ si4. Consider the model
PЕҪ B s k q 1 < S s i, A s j. log P ЕҪ B s k < S s i , A s j . s вҗЈk q вҗӨ1 si q вҗӨ2 aj q вҗӨ3 si aj

with a1 s 0 and a2 s 1. Show that this assumes a linear effect of S with slope вҗӨ1 for age - 40 and вҗӨ1 q вҗӨ3 for age 40бҺҗ59. Using
Г„ si s i4, вҗӨЛҶ1 s 0.115, вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.311, and вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.663 ЕҪSE s 0.164.. In-
terpret the interaction. c. From part ЕҪb., for age 40бҺҗ59 show that the estimated odds of
abnormal rather than borderline breathing for current smokers are 2.18 times those for former smokers and expЕҪ2 = 0.778. s 4.74 times those for never smokers. Explain why the squares of these values are estimated odds of abnormal rather than normal breathing.
7.12 The bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html. has a 7 = 2 table that refers to subjects who graduated from high school in 1965. They were classified as protestors if they took part in at least one demonstration, protest march, or sit-in, and classified according to their party identification in 1982. Analyze the data, using response ЕҪa. party identification, ЕҪb. whether a protestor. Compare interpretations.
7.13 For Table 7.5, the cumulative probit model has fit вҢҪy1w PЛҶЕҪY F j.x s вҗЈЛҶj y 0.195 x1 q 0.683 x2 , with вҗЈЛҶ1 s y0.161, вҗЈЛҶ2 s 0.746, and вҗЈЛҶ3 s 1.339.
Find the means and standard deviation for the two normal cdf вҖҷs that
provide the curves for PЛҶЕҪY ) 2. as a function of x1 s life events index,
at the two levels of x2 s SES. Interpret effects.

308

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

7.14 Analyze Table 7.8 with a cumulative probit model. Compare interpretations to those in the text with other ordinal models.
7.15 Fit a model with complementary log-log link to Table 7.20, which shows family income distributions by percent for families in the northeast U.S. Interpret the difference between the income distributions.

TABLE 7.20 Data for Problem 7.15

Year

0бҺҗ3

3бҺҗ5

5бҺҗ7

Income ЕҪ$1000.

7бҺҗ10

10бҺҗ12

12бҺҗ15

15 q

1960

6.5

8.2

11.3

23.5

15.6

1970

4.3

6.0

7.7

13.2

10.5

12.7

22.2

16.3

42.1

Source: Reproduced with permission from the Royal Statistical Society, London ЕҪMcCullagh 1980..

7.16 Table 7.21 shows results of fitting the mean response model to Table 7.8 using scores Г„3, 10, 20, 354 for income and Г„1, 3, 4, 54 for job satisfaction. Interpret the income effect, provide a confidence interval for the difference in mean satisfaction at income levels 35 and 3, controlling for gender, and check the model fit.

TABLE 7.21 Results for Problem 7.16

Source

DF

Residual

5

Chi- Square 6.99

Pr > ChiSq 0.2211

Effect
Intercept gender income

Analysis of Weighted Least Squares Estimates Parameter Estimate Std Error Chi- Square Pr > ChiSq

1

3.8076

0.1796

449.47

<.0001

2

y0.0687

0.1419

0.23

0.6283

3

0.0160

0.0066

5.97

0.0146

7.17 The bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html. has a 3 = 4 = 4 table that cross-classifies dumping severity ЕҪY . and operation ЕҪ X . for four hospitals ЕҪ H .. The four operations refer to treatments for duodenal ulcer patients and have a natural ordering. Dumping severity describes a possible undesirable side effect of the operation. Its three categories are also ordered.
a. Table 7.22 shows results of generalized CMH tests. Interpret, explaining how one test can be much more significant than the others.

PROBLEMS

TABLE 7.22 Results for Problem 7.17

Summary Statistics for dumping by operate Controlling for hospital

Statistic

Alternative Hypothesis

DF

Value

1

Nonzero Correlation

1

6.3404

2

Row Mean Scores Differ

3

6.5901

3

General Association

6

10.5983

309
Prob 0.0118 0.0862 0.1016

b. Let Г„ xi s i4. Fit the model
logit P ЕҪ Y F j < H s h, X s i . s вҗЈj q вҗ®h q вҗӨ xi .
Test conditional independence of X and Y using it, and interpret
вҗӨЛҶ. Which generalized CMH test has the same spirit as this?
c. Does an improved fit result from allowing the operation effect to vary by hospital? Interpret.
d. Find a mean response model that fits well. Interpret.
7.18 Table 7.23 refers to a study that randomly assigned subjects to a control or treatment group. Daily during the study, treatment subjects ate cereal containing psyllium. The study analyzed the effect on LDL cholesterol. a. Model the ending cholesterol level as a function of treatment, using the beginning level as a covariate. Interpret the treatment effect. b. Repeat part ЕҪa., now treating the beginning level as qualitative. Compare results. c. An alternative to part ЕҪb. uses a generalized CMH test relating treatment to the ending response for partial tables defined by beginning cholesterol level. Apply such a test, taking into account the response ordering, to compare treatments. Interpret, and compare to part ЕҪb..

TABLE 7.23 Data for Problem 7.18

Ending LDL Cholesterol Level

Beginning F 3.4

Control 3.4бҺҗ4.1 4.1бҺҗ4.9

) 4.9

Treatment 3.4 3.4бҺҗ4.1 4.1бҺҗ4.9

F 3.4 18

8

3.4бҺҗ4.1 16

30

4.1бҺҗ4.9

0

14

) 4.9

0

2

0

0

13

2

28

7

15

22

21

4

2

17 25

6

11 35

36

1

5

14

Source: Data courtesy of Sallee Anderson, Kellogg Co.

) 4.9
0 0 6 12

310

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

7.19 Analyze Table 7.5 with each type of model studied in this chapter. Write a report summarizing results and advantages and disadvantages of each modeling strategy.
7.20 The bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html. has a 4 = 4 = 5 table that cross-classifies assessment of cognitive impairment, AlzheimerвҖҷs disease, and age. Analyze these data, treating ЕҪa. AlzheimerвҖҷs disease, and ЕҪb. cognitive impairment, as the response variable.
7.21 Analyze Table 9.5 using logit models that treat ЕҪa. party affiliation, and ЕҪb. ideology, as the response variable.
7.22 The bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html. has a 4 = 2 = 3 = 3 table that refers to a sample of residents of Copenhagen. The variables are type of housing ЕҪ H ., degree of contact with other residents ЕҪC., feeling of influence on apartment management ЕҪ I ., and satisfaction with housing conditions ЕҪS.. Treating S as the response variable, analyze these data.

7.23 Refer to Table 7.17. Analyze these data.

Theory and Methods

7.24 A multivariate generalization of the exponential dispersion family ЕҪ4.14. is
f ЕҪyi ; вҗӘi , вҗҫ . s expГ„ yiX вҗӘi y bЕҪ вҗӘi . raЕҪ вҗҫ . q cЕҪyi , вҗҫ . 4 ,

where вҗӘi is the natural parameter. Show that the multinomial variate yi defined in Section 7.1.5 for a single trial with parameters Г„вҗІj, j s 1, . . . , J y 14 is in the ЕҪ J y 1.-parameter exponential family, with baseline-category logits as natural parameters.
7.25 Cell counts Г„ yi j4 in an I = J contingency table have a multinomial ЕҪ n; Г„вҗІi j4. distribution. Show that Г„ PЕҪYi j s ni j., i s 1, . . . , I, j s 1, . . . , J 4 can be expressed as

Iy1 Jy1

dn n! ЕҒ ЕҒ ЕҪ ni j!.y1exp Гқ Гқ ni j logЕҪвҗЈi j .

ij

is1 js1

Iy1

Jy1

q Гқ niqlogЕҪвҗІ i JrвҗІIJ . q Гқ nqj logЕҪвҗІ IjrвҗІIJ .

is1

js1

PROBLEMS

311

where вҗЈi j s вҗІ i jвҗІ IJrвҗІi JвҗІ Ij and d is a constant independent of the data. Find an alternative expression using local odds ratios Г„вҗӘi j4, by showing that

Гқ Гқ ni j log вҗЈi j s Гқ Гқ si j logвҗӘi j ,

ij

ij

where

si j s Гқ Гқ nab .
aFi bFj

7.26 Suppose that we express ЕҪ7.2. as

X
expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨ j x.

вҗІjЕҪx. s J

X.

Гқhs1 expЕҪвҗЈh q вҗӨh x.

Show

that

dividing

numerator

and

denominator

by

expЕҪвҗЈJ

q

X
вҗӨJ

x.

yields new parameters вҗЈj* s вҗЈj y вҗЈ J and вҗӨj* s вҗӨj y вҗӨJ that satisfy

вҗЈ J s 0 and вҗӨ J s 0. Thus, without loss of generality, вҗЈ J s 0 and

вҗӨ J s 0.

7.27 When J s 3, suppose that
вҗІj ЕҪ x . s expЕҪвҗЈj q вҗӨj x .r 1 q expЕҪвҗЈ1 q вҗӨ1 x . q expЕҪвҗЈ2 q вҗӨ2 x . ,

j s 1, 2. Show that вҗІ 3ЕҪ x. is ЕҪa. decreasing in x if вҗӨ1 ) 0 and вҗӨ2 ) 0, ЕҪb. increasing in x if вҗӨ1 - 0 and вҗӨ2 - 0, and ЕҪc. nonmonotone when вҗӨ1 and вҗӨ2 have different signs.

7.28 Refer to the log-likelihood function for the baseline-category logit model ЕҪSection 7.1.4.. Denote the sufficient statistics by npj s Гқi yi j and Sjk s Гқi xik yi j, j s 1, . . . J y 1, k s 1, . . . , p. Let S s ЕҪS11, . . . , S1t , . . . SJ1, . . . , SJt .X. Condition on Гқi yi j, j s 1, . . . , J. Under the null hypothesis that explanatory variables have no effect, show that
EЕҪS. s nЕҪp m m. , varЕҪS. s nЕҪV m вҢә . ,
where p s ЕҪ p1, . . . , pJ .X; m s ЕҪ x1, . . . , xt .X, where xk s ЕҪГқi xik .rn; вҢә has elements ЕҪ sk2В®., where sk2В® s wГқiЕҪ xik y xk .ЕҪ xiВ® y xВ®.xrЕҪ n y 1.; V has elements В®ii s piЕҪ1 y pi. and В®i j s y pi pj, and m denotes the Kronecker product ЕҪZelen 1991..

7.29 Is the proportional odds model a special case of a baseline-category logit model? Explain why or why not.
7.30 Prove factorization ЕҪ7.15. for the multinomial distribution.

312

LOGIT MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL RESPONSES

7.31 Show that for the model, logitw PЕҪY F j.x s вҗЈj q вҗӨj x, cumulative probabilities may be misordered for some x values.

7.32 For an I = J contingency table with ordinal Y and scores Г„ xi s i4 for x, consider the model

logit P ЕҪ Y F j < X s xi . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ xi .

ЕҪ 7 .24.

a. Show that logitw PЕҪY F j < X s xiq1 .x y logitw PЕҪY F j < X s xi.x s вҗӨ. Show that this difference in logits is a log cumulative odds ratio for the 2 = 2 table consisting of rows i and i q 1 and the binary response having cutpoint following category j. Thus, ЕҪ7.24. is a uniform association model in cumulative odds ratios.
b. Show that residual df s IJ y I y J. c. Show that independence of X and Y is the special case вҗӨ s 0. d. Using the same linear predictor but with adjacent-categories logits,
show that uniform association applies to the local odds ratios ЕҪ2.10.. e. A generalization of ЕҪ7.24. replaces Г„ вҗӨ xi4 by unordered parameters
Г„ вҗ®i4, hence treating X as nominal. For rows a and b, show that the log cumulative odds ratio equals вҗ®a y вҗ®b for all J y 1 cutpoints.
7.33 Suppose that model ЕҪ7.24. holds for a 2 = J table with J ) 2, and let x2 y x1 s 1. Explain why local log odds ratios are typically smaller in absolute value than the cumulative log odds ratio вҗӨ. wIn fact, on p. 122 of their first edition, McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989. noted that local odds ratios Г„вҗӘ1 j4 relate to вҗӨ by
logвҗӘ1 j s вҗӨ P ЕҪ Y F j q 1. y P ЕҪ Y F j y 1. q oЕҪ вҗӨ . , j s 1, . . . , J y 1,
where oЕҪвҗӨ.rвҗӨ в„ў 0 as вҗӨ в„ў 0.x
7.34 A response scale has the categories ЕҪstrongly agree, mildly agree, mildly disagree, strongly disagree, donвҖҷt know.. One way to model such a scale uses a logit model for the probability of a donвҖҷt know response and uses a separate ordinal model for the ordered categories conditional on response in one of those categories. Explain how to construct a likelihood to do this simultaneously.
7.35 For the cumulative probit model вҢҪy1w PЕҪY F j.x s вҗЈj y вҗӨX x, explain why a 1-unit increase in xi corresponds to a вҗӨi standard deviation increase in the expected underlying latent response, controlling for other predictors.

PROBLEMS

313

7.36 For cumulative link model ЕҪ7.7., show that for 1 F j - k F J y 1, PЕҪY F k < x. s PЕҪY F j < x*., where x* is obtained by increasing the ith component of x by ЕҪвҗЈk y вҗЈj.rвҗӨi. Interpret.

7.37 A cumulative link model for an I = J contingency table with a qualitative predictor is
Gy1 P ЕҪ Y F j . s вҗЈj q вҗ®i , i s 1, . . . , I, j s 1, . . . , J y 1 .

a. Show that the residual df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 2..
b. When this model holds, show that independence corresponds to вҗ®1 s РёРёРё s вҗ®I and the test of independence has df s I y 1.
c. When this model holds, show that the rows are stochastically ordered on Y.

7.38 F1ЕҪ y. s 1 y expЕҪyвҗӯ y. for y ) 0 is a negative exponential cdf with parameter вҗӯ, and F2ЕҪ y. s 1 y expЕҪyвҗ® y. for y ) 0. Show that the difference between the cdf вҖҷs on a complementary log-log scale is
identical for all y. Give implications for categorical data analysis.

7.39

Consider

the

model

Linkw

вҗ»

j

ЕҪx.x

s

вҗЈ

j

q

X
вҗӨj

x,

where

вҗ» j ЕҪx.

is

ЕҪ7.14..

a. Explain why this model can be fitted separately for j s 1, . . . , J y 1.

b. For the complementary log-log link, show that this model is equiva-
lent to one using the same link for cumulative probabilities ЕҪLВЁaВЁarВЁa
and Matthews 1985..

7.40 Why is it not optimal to fit mean response models for ordinal responses using ordinary least squares as is done for normal regression?

7.41 When X and Y are ordinal, explain how to test conditional independence by allowing a different trend in each partial table. w Hint: Generalize model ЕҪ7.17. by replacing вҗӨ by вҗӨk.x
7.42 A cafe has four entrВҙees: chicken, beef, fish, vegetarian. Specify a model of form ЕҪ7.22. for the selection of an entrВҙee using x s gender ЕҪ1 s female, 0 s male. and u s cost of entrВҙee, which is a characteristic of
the choices. Interpret the model parameters.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 8
Loglinear Models for Contingency Tables
In Section 4.3 we introduced loglinear models as generalized linear models ЕҪGLMs. using the log link function with a Poisson response. A common use is modeling cell counts in contingency tables. The models specify how the expected count depends on levels of the categorical variables for that cell as well as associations and interactions among those variables. The purpose of loglinear modeling is the analysis of association and interaction patterns.
In Section 8.1 we introduce loglinear models for two-way contingency tables. In Sections 8.2 and 8.3 we extend them to three-way tables, and in Section 8.4 discuss models for multiway tables. Loglinear models are of use primarily when at least two variables are response variables. With a single categorical response, it is simpler and more natural to use logit models. When one variable is treated as a response and the others as explanatory variables, logit models for that response variable are equivalent to certain loglinear models. Section 8.5 covers this connection. In Sections 8.6 and 8.7 we discuss ML loglinear model fitting.
8.1 LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR TWO-WAY TABLES
Consider an I = J contingency table that cross-classifies a multinomial sample of n subjects on two categorical responses. The cell probabilities are Г„вҗІi j4 and the expected frequencies are Г„вҗ®i j s nвҗІi j4. Loglinear model formulas use Г„вҗ®i j4 rather than Г„вҗІi j4, so they also apply with Poisson sampling for N s IJ independent cell counts Г„Yi j4 having Г„вҗ®i j s EЕҪYi j.4. In either case we denote the observed cell counts by Г„ni j4.
8.1.1 Independence Model Under statistical independence, in Section 4.3.6 we noted that the Г„вҗ®i j4 have the structure
вҗ®i j s вҗ®вҗЈi вҗӨj . 314

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR TWO-WAY TABLES

315

For multinomial sampling, for instance, вҗ®i j s nвҗІiqвҗІqj. Denote the row variable by X and the column variable by Y. The formula expressing
independence is multiplicative. Thus, log вҗ®i j has additive form

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY

ЕҪ 8 .1.

for a row effect вҗӯiX and a column effect вҗӯYj . This is the loglinear model of independence. As usual, identifiability requires constraints such as вҗӯIX s вҗӯJY s 0.
The ML fitted values are Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j s niqnqjrn4, the estimated expected fre-
quencies for chi-squared tests of independence. The tests using X 2 and G2 ЕҪSection 3.2.1. are also goodness-of-fit tests of this loglinear model.

8.1.2 Interpretation of Parameters
Loglinear models for contingency tables are GLMs that treat the N cell counts as independent observations of a Poisson random component. Loglinear GLMs identify the data as the N cell counts rather than the individual classifications of the n subjects. The expected cell counts link to the explanatory terms using the log link. As ЕҪ8.1. illustrates, of the cross-classified variables, the model does not distinguish between response and explanatory variables. It treats both jointly as responses, modeling Г„вҗ®i j4 for combinations of their levels. To interpret parameters, however, it is helpful to treat the variables asymmetrically.
We illustrate with the independence model for I = 2 tables. In row i, the logit equals
logit P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s i. s log P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s i. P ЕҪ Y s 2 < X s i.
s log s вҗ®i1 log вҗ®i1 y log вҗ®i2 вҗ®i2
s ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯ1Y . y ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯ2Y .sвҗӯ1Y y вҗӯ2Y .
The final term does not depend on i; that is, logitw PЕҪY s 1 < X s i.x is identical at each level of X. Thus, independence implies a model of form, logitw PЕҪY s 1 < X s i.x s вҗЈ. In each row, the odds of response in column 1 equal expЕҪвҗЈ. s expЕҪ вҗӯ1Y y вҗӯ2Y ..
An analogous property holds when J ) 2. Differences between two parameters for a given variable relate to the log odds of making one response, relative to the other, on that variable. Of course, with a single response variable, logit models apply directly and loglinear models are unneeded.

316

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

8.1.3 Saturated Model

Statistically dependent variables satisfy a more complex loglinear model,

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯ X Y i j .

ЕҪ 8 .2.

The Г„вҗӯX Y i j 4 are association terms that reflect deviations from independence.

The right-hand side of ЕҪ8.2. resembles the formula for cell means in two-way

ANOVA, allowing interaction. The Г„вҗӯX Y i j 4 represent interactions between X

and Y, whereby the effect of one variable on вҗ®i j depends on the level of the

other. The independence model ЕҪ8.1. results when all вҗӯi jX Y s 0.

With

constraints

вҗӯIX s вҗӯJY s 0

in

ЕҪ8.1.

and

ЕҪ8.2.,

Г„

вҗӯ

X i

4

and

Г„ вҗӯjY 4

are,

equivalently, coefficients of dummy variables for the first ЕҪ I y 1. categories

of X and the first ЕҪ J y 1. categories of Y. Thus, вҗӯi jX Y is the coefficient of the

product of dummy variables for вҗӯiX and вҗӯYj . Since there are ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.

such cross products, вҗӯX Y Ij s вҗӯX Y i J s 0, and only ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. of these

parameters are nonredundant. Tests of independence analyze whether these ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. parameters equal zero, so they have residual df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1..
The number of parameters in model ЕҪ8.2. equals 1 q ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1. q ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. s IJ, the number of cells. Hence, this model describes perfectly any Г„вҗ®i j ) 04 ЕҪsee Problem 8.16.. It is the most general model for

two-way contingency tables, the saturated model. For it, direct relationships exist between log odds ratios and Г„вҗӯXi j Y 4. For instance, for 2 = 2 tables,

log вҗӘ s log s вҗ®11 вҗ®22 log вҗ®11 q log вҗ®22 y log вҗ®12 y log вҗ®21 вҗ®12 вҗ®21
s ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯ1X q вҗӯ1Y q вҗӯ11X Y . q ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯ2X q вҗӯ2Y q вҗӯ22X Y . yЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯ1X q вҗӯ2Y q вҗӯ12X Y . y ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯ2X q вҗӯ1Y q вҗӯ21X Y .

s вҗӯ11X Y q вҗӯ22X Y y вҗӯ12X Y y вҗӯ21X Y .

ЕҪ 8 .3.

Thus, Г„ вҗӯX Y i j 4 determine the association. In practice, unsaturated models are preferable, since their fit smooths the
sample data and has simpler interpretations. For tables with at least three
variables, unsaturated models can include association terms. Then, loglinear models are more commonly used to describe associations ЕҪthrough two-factor terms. than to describe odds ЕҪthrough single-factor terms..
Like others in this book, model ЕҪ8.2. is hierarchical. This means that the
model includes all lower-order terms composed from variables contained in a higher-order model term. When the model contains вҗӯi jX Y, it also contains вҗӯiX and вҗӯYj . A reason for including lower-order terms is that, otherwise, the statistical significance and the interpretation of a higher-order term depends
on how variables are coded. This is undesirable, and with hierarchical models
the same results occur no matter how variables are coded.

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR TWO-WAY TABLES

317

An example of a nonhierarchical model is

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯi jX Y .

This model permits association but forces unnatural behavior of expected frequencies, with the pattern depending on constraints used for parameters. For instance, with constraints whereby parameters are zero at the last level, log вҗ®Ij s вҗӯ in every column. Nonhierarchical models are rarely sensible in practice. Using them is analogous to using ANOVA or regression models with interaction terms but without the corresponding main effects.
When a model has two-factor terms, interpretations focus on them rather than on the single-factor terms. By analogy with two-way ANOVA with two-factor interaction, it can be misleading to report main effects. The estimates of the main-effect terms depend on the coding scheme used for the higher-order effects, and the interpretation also depends on that scheme ЕҪsee Problem 8.16.. Normally, we restrict our attention to the highest-order terms for a variable, as we illustrate in Section 8.2.

8.1.4 Alternative Parameter Constraints
As with the independence model, the parameter constraints for the saturated model are arbitrary. Instead of setting all вҗӯX Y Ij s вҗӯX Y i J s 0, one could set Гқi вҗӯi jX Y s Гқj вҗӯi jX Y s 0 for all i and j. Different software uses different constraints. What is unique are contrasts such as вҗӯ11X Y q вҗӯ22X Y y вҗӯ12X Y y вҗӯ21X Y in ЕҪ8.3. that determine odds ratios.
For instance, suppose that a log odds ratio equals 2.0 in a 2 = 2 table. With the first set of constraints, 2.0 is the coefficient of a product of a dummy variable indicating the first category of X and a dummy variable indicating the first category of Y. With it, вҗӯ11X Y s 2.0 and вҗӯ12X Y s вҗӯ21X Y s вҗӯ22X Y s 0. For sum-to-zero constraints, вҗӯ11X Y s вҗӯ22X Y s 0.5, вҗӯ12X Y s вҗӯ21X Y s y0.5. For either set, the log odds ratio ЕҪ8.3. equals 2.0. For a set of parameters, an advantage of setting a baseline parameter equal to 0 instead of the sum equal to 0 is that some parameters in a set can have infinite estimates.

8.1.5 Multinomial Models for Cell Probabilities
Conditional on the sum n of the cell counts, Poisson loglinear models for Г„вҗ®i j4 become multinomial models for cell probabilities Г„вҗІi j s вҗ®i jrЕҪГқГқ вҗ®ab.4. To illustrate, for the saturated model,

expЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯi jX Y .
вҗІ i j s Гқ Гқ expЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯaX q вҗӯbY q вҗӯab X Y . .
ab

ЕҪ 8 .4.

318

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

This representation implies the usual constraints for probabilities, Г„вҗІi j G 04 and ГқiГқjвҗІi j s 1. The вҗӯ intercept parameter cancels in the multinomial model ЕҪ8.4.. This parameter relates purely to the total sample size, which is random in the Poisson model but not in the multinomial model.

8.2 LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR INDEPENDENCE AND INTERACTION IN THREE-WAY TABLES
In Section 2.3 we introduced three-way contingency tables and related structure such as conditional independence and homogeneous association. Loglinear models for three-way tables describe their independence and association patterns.

8.2.1 Types of Independence

A three-way I = J = K cross-classification of response variables X, Y, and Z
has several potential types of independence. We assume a multinomial distribution with cell probabilities Г„вҗІi jk4, and ГқiГқjГқkвҗІi jk s 1.0. The models also apply to Poisson sampling with means Г„вҗ®i jk4.
The three variables are mutually independent when

вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqqвҗІqjq вҗІqqk for all i , j, and k.

ЕҪ 8 .5.

For expected frequencies Г„вҗ®i jk4, mutual independence has loglinear form

log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯZk .

ЕҪ 8 .6.

Variable Y is jointly independent of X and Z when вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqk вҗІqjq for all i , j, and k.

ЕҪ 8 .7.

This is ordinary two-way independence between Y and a variable composed of the IK combinations of levels of X and Z. The loglinear model is

log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯ X Z ik .

ЕҪ 8 .8.

Similarly, X could be jointly independent of Y and Z, or Z could be jointly independent of X and Y. Mutual independence ЕҪ8.5. implies joint independence of any one variable from the others.
From Section 2.3, X and Y are conditionally independent, giВ®en Z when independence holds for each partial table within which Z is fixed. That is, if вҗІi j< k s PЕҪ X s i, Y s j < Z s k., then
вҗІ i j< k s вҗІ iq< kвҗІqj < k for all i , j, and k.

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR THREE-WAY TABLES

319

For joint probabilities over the entire table, equivalently вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqk вҗІqj krвҗІqqk for all i , j, and k.

ЕҪ 8 .9.

Conditional independence of X and Y, given Z, is the loglinear model

log

вҗ®i jk

s

вҗӯ

q

вҗӯ

X i

q вҗӯjY

q вҗӯkZ

q вҗӯi kX Z

q вҗӯY Z jk .

ЕҪ 8 .10.

This is a weaker condition than mutual or joint independence. Mutual independence implies that Y is jointly independent of X and Z, which itself implies that X and Y are conditionally independent. Table 8.1 summarizes these three types of independence.
In Section 2.3.2 we showed that partial associations can be quite different from marginal associations. For instance, conditional independence does not imply marginal independence. Conditional independence and marginal independence both hold when one of the stronger types of independence studied above applies. Figure 8.1 summarizes relationships among the four types of independence.

8.2.2 Homogeneous Association and Three-Factor Interaction
Loglinear models ЕҪ8.6., ЕҪ8.8., and ЕҪ8.10. have three, two, and one pair of conditionally independent variables, respectively. In the latter two models,

TABLE 8.1 Summary of Loglinear Independence Models

Model
ЕҪ8.6. ЕҪ8.8. ЕҪ8.10.

Probabilistic Form for вҗІ i jk
вҗІ iqqвҗІqjq вҗІqqk вҗІ iqk вҗІqjq вҗІ iqk вҗІqj krвҗІqqk

Association Terms in Loglinear Model
None вҗӯi kX Z вҗӯi kX Z q вҗӯjkY Z

Interpretation
Variables mutually independent Y independent of X and Z X and Y independent, given Z

FIGURE 8.1 Relationships among types of XY independence.

320

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

the doubly subscripted terms ЕҪsuch as вҗӯX Y i j . pertain to conditionally dependent variables. A model that permits all three pairs to be conditionally
dependent is

log

вҗ®i jk

s

вҗӯ

q

вҗӯ

X i

q вҗӯjY

q вҗӯkZ

q вҗӯi jX Y

q вҗӯikX Z

q вҗӯY Z jk .

ЕҪ 8 .11.

From exponentiating both sides, the cell probabilities have form вҗІi jk s вҗәi jвҗҫjk вҗ»ik .

No closed-form expression exists for the three components in terms of margins of Г„вҗІi jk4 except in certain special cases ЕҪsee Note 9.2..
For this model, in the next section we show that conditional odds ratios between any two variables are identical at each category of the third variable. That is, each pair has homogeneous association ЕҪSection 2.3.5.. Model ЕҪ8.11. is called the loglinear model of homogeneous association or of no three-factor interaction.
The general loglinear model for a three-way table is

log

вҗ®i jk

s

вҗӯ

q

вҗӯ

X i

q вҗӯjY

q вҗӯkZ

qвҗӯi jX Y

q вҗӯi kX Z

q вҗӯjkY Z

q вҗӯi jk X Y Z .

ЕҪ 8 .12.

With dummy variables, вҗӯi jk X Y Z is the coefficient of the product of the ith dummy variable for X, jth dummy variable for Y, and kth dummy variable for Z. The total number of nonredundant parameters is
1 q ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1. q ЕҪ K y 1. q ЕҪ I y 1. ЕҪ J y 1. q ЕҪ I y 1. ЕҪ K y 1. qЕҪ J y 1. ЕҪ K y 1. q ЕҪ I y 1. ЕҪ J y 1. ЕҪ K y 1. s IJK ,

the total number of cell counts. This model has as many parameters as observations and is saturated. It describes all possible positive Г„вҗ®i jk4. Each pair of variables may be conditionally dependent, and an odds ratio for any pair may vary across categories of the third variable.
Setting certain parameters equal to zero in ЕҪ8.12. yields the models introduced previously. Table 8.2 lists some of these models. To ease referring to models, Table 8.2 assigns to each model a symbol that lists the highest-order

TABLE 8.2 Loglinear Models for Three-Dimensional Tables Loglinear Model log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯi jX Y log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯi jX Y q вҗӯjkYZ log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯi jX Y q вҗӯjkYZ q вҗӯikXZ log вҗ®i jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯi jX Y q вҗӯjkYZ q вҗӯikXZ q вҗӯi jk X YZ

Symbol ЕҪ X, Y, Z. ЕҪ XY, Z. ЕҪ XY, YZ. ЕҪ XY, YZ, XZ. ЕҪ XYZ.

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR THREE-WAY TABLES

321

termЕҪs. for each variable. For instance, the model ЕҪ8.10. of conditional independence between X and Y has symbol ЕҪ XZ, YZ., since its highest-order terms are вҗӯikXZ and вҗӯjkY Z. In the notation we used for logit models in Sections 6.1 and 7.1.2 this stands for ЕҪ X *Z q Y *Z., which is itself shorthand for notation ЕҪ X q Y q Z q X = Z q Y = Z. that has the main effects as well as
interactions.

8.2.3 Interpreting Model Parameters
Interpretations of loglinear model parameters use their highest-order terms. For instance, interpretations for model ЕҪ8.11. use the two-factor terms to describe conditional odds ratios. At a fixed level k of Z, the conditional association between X and Y uses ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. odds ratios, such as the local odds ratios

вҗӘi jЕҪ k . s вҗІ i jkвҗІ iq1 , jq1 , k , вҗІ i , jq1 , kвҗІ iq1 , j, k

1 F i F I y 1, 1 F j F J y 1. ЕҪ8.13.

Similarly, ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. odds ratios Г„вҗӘiЕҪ j.k4 describe XZ conditional association, and ЕҪ J y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. odds ratios Г„вҗӘЕҪi. jk4 describe YZ conditional association. Loglinear models have characterizations using constraints on
conditional odds ratios. For instance, conditional independence of X and Y is equivalent to Г„вҗӘi jЕҪk. s 1, i s 1, . . . , I y 1, j s 1, . . . , J y 1, k s 1, . . . , K 4.
The two-factor parameters relate directly to the conditional odds ratios. To illustrate, substituting ЕҪ8.11. for model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. into log вҗӘi jЕҪk. yields

log вҗӘi jЕҪ k . s log s вҗ®i jk вҗ®iq1 , jq1 ,k вҗӯi jX Y q вҗӯiq1 , jq1 X Y y вҗӯi , jq1 X Y y вҗӯiq1 , j X Y . вҗ®iq1 , jk вҗ®1, jq1 , k

ЕҪ 8 .14.

Since the right-hand side is the same for all k, an absence of three-factor interaction is equivalent to
вҗӘi jЕҪ1. s вҗӘi jЕҪ2. s РёРёРё s вҗӘi jЕҪ K . for all i and j.

The same argument for the other conditional odds ratios shows that model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. is also equivalent to

вҗӘiЕҪ1. k s вҗӘiЕҪ2. k s РёРёРё s вҗӘiЕҪ J .k for all i and k ,

and to

вҗӘЕҪ1. jk s вҗӘЕҪ2. jk s РёРёРё s вҗӘЕҪ I . jk for all j and k.

Any model not having the three-factor interaction term has a homogeneous association for each pair of variables.

322

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

When X and Y have two categories, only one nonredundant вҗӯi jX Y parameter occurs. Thus, expression ЕҪ8.14. is simplified depending on the constraints.
By the same argument as in Section 8.1.3 for 2 = 2 tables, the conditional log odds ratio simplifies to вҗӯ11X Y with dummy-variable constraints setting parameters at the second level of X or Y equal to 0.
The вҗӯi jk X Y Z term in the general model ЕҪ8.12. refers to three-factor interaction. It describes how the odds ratio between two variables changes across
categories of the third. We illustrate for 2 = 2 = 2 tables. By direct substitu-
tion of the general model formula,

вҗӘ 11ЕҪ1.

ЕҪ вҗ®111 вҗ®221 . rЕҪ вҗ®121 вҗ®211 .

log вҗӘ11ЕҪ2. s log ЕҪ вҗ®112 вҗ®222 . rЕҪ вҗ®122 вҗ®212 .

s ЕҪ вҗӯ111 X Y Z q вҗӯ221 X Y Z y вҗӯ121 X Y Z y вҗӯ211 X Y Z . yЕҪ вҗӯ112 X Y Z q вҗӯ222 X Y Z y вҗӯ122 X Y Z y вҗӯ212 X Y Z . .

Only one parameter is nonredundant. For constraints setting the second-category parameters equal to 0, this log ratio of odds ratios equals вҗӯ111 X Y Z. When вҗӯ111 X Y Z s 0, вҗӘ11ЕҪ1. s вҗӘ11ЕҪ2., giving homogeneous XY association.

8.2.4 Alcohol, Cigarette, and Marijuana Use Example
Table 8.3 refers to a 1992 survey by the Wright State University School of Medicine and the United Health Services in Dayton, Ohio. The survey asked 2276 students in their final year of high school in a nonurban area near Dayton, Ohio whether they had ever used alcohol, cigarettes, or marijuana. Denote the variables in this 2 = 2 = 2 table by A for alcohol use, C for cigarette use, and M for marijuana use.
Section 8.7 covers the fitting of loglinear models. For now, we emphasize interpretation. Table 8.4 shows fitted values for several loglinear models. The

TABLE 8.3 Alcohol, Cigarette, and Marijuana Use for High School Seniors

Alcohol Use

Cigarette Use

Marijuana Use

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

911

538

No

44

456

No

Yes

3

43

No

2

279

Source: Data courtesy of Harry Khamis, Wright State University.

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR THREE-WAY TABLES

323

TABLE 8.4 Fitted Values for Loglinear Models Applied to Table 8.3

Alcohol Cigarette Marijuana

Loglinear Modela

Use

Use

Use ЕҪ A, C, M . ЕҪ AC, M . ЕҪ AM, CM . ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . ЕҪ ACM .

Yes

Yes

Yes

540.0 611.2 909.24

910.4

911

No

740.2 837.8 438.84

538.6

538

No

Yes

282.1 210.9 45.76

44.6

44

No

386.7 289.1 555.16

455.4

456

No

Yes

Yes

90.6

19.4

4.76

3.6

3

No

124.2

26.6 142.16

42.4

43

No

Yes

47.3 118.5

0.24

1.4

2

No

64.9 162.5 179.84

279.6

279

aA, alcohol use; C, cigarette use; M, marijuana use.

fit for model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . is close to the observed data, which are the fitted values for the saturated model ЕҪ ACM .. The other models fit poorly.
Table 8.5 illustrates model association patterns by presenting estimated conditional and marginal odds ratios. For example, the entry 1.0 for the AC conditional association for the model ЕҪ AM, CM . of AC conditional independence is the common value of the AC fitted odds ratios at the two levels of M,
909.24 = 0.24 438.84 = 179.84 1.0 s 45.76 = 4.76 s 555.16 = 142.16 .
The entry 2.7 for the AC marginal association for this model is the odds ratio for the marginal AC fitted table. The odds ratios for the observed data are those reported for the saturated model ЕҪ ACM ..
Table 8.5 shows that estimated conditional odds ratios equal 1.0 for each pairwise term not appearing in a model, such as the AC association in model ЕҪ AM, CM .. For that model, the estimated marginal AC odds ratio differs from 1.0, since conditional independence does not imply marginal independence. Some models have conditional associations that are necessarily the

TABLE 8.5 Estimated Odds Ratios for Loglinear Models in Table 8.5

Conditional Association

Marginal Association

Model

AC

AM

CM

AC

AM

CM

ЕҪ A, C, M .

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

ЕҪ AC, M .

17.7

1.0

1.0

17.7

1.0

1.0

ЕҪ AM, CM .

1.0

61.9

25.1

2.7

61.9

25.1

ЕҪ AC, AM, CM .

7.8

19.8

17.3

17.7

61.9

25.1

ЕҪ ACM . level 1

13.8

24.3

17.5

17.7

61.9

25.1

ЕҪ ACM . level 2

7.7

13.5

9.7

324

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

same as the corresponding marginal associations. In Section 9.1.2 we present

a condition guaranteeing this. Model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . permits all pairwise associations but maintains

homogeneous odds ratios between two variables at each level of the third.

The AC fitted conditional odds ratios for this model equal 7.8. One can

calculate this odds ratio using the modelвҖҷs fitted values at either level of M,

or wfrom ЕҪ8.14.x using exp ЕҪ вҗӯЛҶ1A1C q вҗӯЛҶAC 22 y

вҗӯЛҶAC y вҗӯЛҶAC ..

12

21

Table 8.5 shows that estimated odds ratios are very dependent on the

model. This highlights the importance of good model selection. An estimate

from this table is informative only to the extent that its model fits well. In the

next section we discuss goodness of fit.

8.3 INFERENCE FOR LOGLINEAR MODELS
A good-fitting loglinear model provides a basis for describing and making inferences about associations among categorical responses. Standard methods apply for checking fit and making inference about model parameters.
8.3.1 Chi-Squared Goodness-of-Fit Tests As usual, X 2 and G2 test whether a model holds by comparing cell fitted values to observed counts. Here df equals the number of cell counts minus the number of model parameters.
For the student survey ЕҪTable 8.3., Table 8.6 shows results of testing fit for several loglinear models. Models that lack any association term fit poorly. The model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . that has all pairwise associations fits well ЕҪ P s 0.54.. It is suggested by other criteria also, such as minimizing
AIC s y2ЕҪmaximized log likelihoodбҺҸnumber of parameters in model.
or equivalently, minimizing wG2 y 2ЕҪdf.x.

TABLE 8.6 Goodness-of-Fit Tests for Loglinear Models in Table 8.4

Model

G2

X2

df

ЕҪ A, C, M .

1286.0

1411.4

4

ЕҪ A, CM . ЕҪC, AM . ЕҪ M, AC.

534.2 939.6 843.8

505.6

3

824.2

3

704.9

3

ЕҪ AC, AM . ЕҪ AC, CM . ЕҪ AM, CM .

497.4 92.0 187.8

443.8

2

80.8

2

177.6

2

ЕҪ AC, AM, CM .

0.4

0.4

1

ЕҪ ACM .

0.0

0.0

0

aP-value for G2 statistic.

P-value a
- 0.001 - 0.001 - 0.001 - 0.001 - 0.001 - 0.001 - 0.001
0.54 бҺҸ

INFERENCE FOR LOGLINEAR MODELS

325

8.3.2 Inference about Conditional Associations
Tests about conditional associations compare loglinear models. The likelihood-ratio statistic y2ЕҪ L0 y L1. is identical to the difference G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. s G2ЕҪ M0. y G2ЕҪ M1. between deviances for models without that term and with it. For model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., consider the hypothesis of XY conditional independence. This is H0: вҗӯX Y i j s 0 for the ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. XY association parameters. The test statistic is G2ЕҪ XZ, YZ. y G2ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., with df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. This has the same purpose as the generalized CMH and model-based tests for nominal variables presented in Section 7.5.
For instance, the test of conditional independence between alcohol use and cigarette smoking compares model ЕҪ AM, CM . with the alternative ЕҪ AC, AM, CM .. The test statistic is

G2 ЕҪ AM, CM . <ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . s 187.8 y 0.4 s 187.4,

with df s 2 y 1 s 1 ЕҪ P - 0.001.. The statistics comparing ЕҪ AC, CM . and ЕҪ AC, AM . with ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . also provide strong evidence of AM and CM conditional associations. Further analyses of Table 8.3 use model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM ..
With large sample sizes, statistically significant effects can be weak and unimportant. A more relevant concern is whether the associations are strong enough to be important. Confidence intervals are more useful than tests for assessing this. Table 8.7 shows output from fitting model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . with

TABLE 8.7 Output for Fitting Loglinear Model to Table 8.3

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Value / DF

Deviance

1

0.3740

0.3740

Pearson Chi- Square

1

0.4011

0.4011

Standard

Wald

Parameter

Estimate

Error

Chi- Square Pr>ChiSq

Intercept

5.6334

0.0597

8903.96

<.0001

a

1

0.4877

0.0758

41.44

<.0001

c

1

y1.8867

0.1627

134.47

<.0001

m

1

y5.3090

0.4752

124.82

<.0001

a*m

11

2.9860

0.4647

41.29

<.0001

a*c

11

2.0545

0.1741

139.32

<.0001

c*m

11

2.8479

0.1638

302.14

<.0001

LR Statistics

Source

DF

a*m

1

a*c

1

c*m

1

Chi- Square 91.64
187.38 497.00

Pr>ChiSq <.0001 <.0001 <.0001

326

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

parameters in the last row and in the last column equal to zero, such as by

using ЕҪ1, 0. dummy variables for each classification. Consider the conditional

AC

odds

ratio,

assuming

model

ЕҪ AC, AM, CM ..

Table

8.7

reports

вҗӯЛҶAC s
11

2.054, with SE s 0.174. For these constraints, this is the estimated condi-

tional log odds ratio. A 95% Wald confidence interval for the true conditional AC odds ratio is expw2.054 " 1.96ЕҪ0.174.x, or ЕҪ5.5, 11.0.. Strong posi-

tive association exists between cigarette use and alcohol use, both for users

and nonusers of marijuana. For model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM ., the 95% Wald confidence intervals are
ЕҪ8.0, 49.2. for the AM conditional odds ratio and ЕҪ12.5, 23.8. for the CM

conditional odds ratio. The intervals are wide, but these associations also are

strong. Table 8.5 shows that estimated marginal associations are even stronger.

Controlling for outcome on one response moderates the association some-

what between the other two.

The analyses in this section pertain to associations. A different analysis

pertains to comparing single-variable marginal distributions, for instance to

determine if students used cigarettes more than alcohol or marijuana. That

type of analysis is presented in Section 10.1.

8.4 LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR HIGHER DIMENSIONS
Loglinear models for three-way tables are more complex than for two-way tables, because of the variety of potential association terms. Loglinear models for three-way tables extend readily, however, to multiway tables. As the number of dimensions increases, some complications arise. One is the increase in the number of possible association and interaction terms, making model selection more difficult. Another is the increase in number of cells. In Section 9.8 we show that this can cause difficulties with existence of estimates and appropriateness of asymptotic theory.
8.4.1 Four-Way Contingency Tables
We illustrate models for higher dimensions using a four-way table with variables W, X, Y, and Z. Interpretations are simplest when the model has no three-factor interaction terms. Such models are special cases of
log вҗ®hi jk s вҗӯ q вҗӯhW q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯkZ
q вҗӯhi W X q вҗӯh j W Y q вҗӯh k W Z q вҗӯi jX Y q вҗӯikX Z q вҗӯjkY Z ,
denoted by ЕҪWX, WY, WZ, XY, XZ, YZ.. Each pair of variables is conditionally dependent, with the same odds ratios at each combination of categories of the other two variables. An absence of a two-factor term implies conditional independence, given the other two variables.

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR HIGHER DIMENSIONS

327

A variety of models exhibit three-factor interaction. A model could contain any of WXY, WXZ, WYZ, or XYZ terms. For model ЕҪWXY, WZ, XZ, YZ., each pair of variables is conditionally dependent, but at each level of Z the WX association, the WY association, and the XY association may vary across categories of the remaining variable. The conditional association between Z and another variable is homogeneous. The saturated model contains all the three-factor terms plus a four-factor interaction term.

8.4.2 Automobile Accident Example
Table 8.8 summarizes observations of 68,694 passengers in autos and light trucks involved in accidents in the state of Maine in 1991. The table classifies passengers by gender ЕҪG., location of accident ЕҪ L., seat-belt use ЕҪS., and injury ЕҪ I .. Table 8.8 reports the sample proportion of passengers who were injured. For each GL combination, the proportion of injuries was about halved for passengers wearing seat belts.
Table 8.9 displays tests of fit for several loglinear models. To investigate the complexity of model needed, we consider models ЕҪG, I, L, S.,

TABLE 8.8 Loglinear Models for Injury, Seat-Belt Use, Gender, and Locationa

Seat Gender Location Belt

Injury No Yes

ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS.

No

Yes

ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS. Sample Proportion

No

Yes

Yes

Female Male

Urban Rural Urban Rural

No 7,287 996 Yes 11,587 759 No 3,246 973 Yes 6,134 757 No 10,381 812 Yes 10,969 380 No 6,123 1,084 Yes 6,693 513

7,166.4 11,748.3 3,353.8 5,985.5 10,471.5 10,837.8 6,045.3 6,811.4

993.0 7,273.2 1,009.8 0.12 721.3 11,632.6 713.4 0.06 988.8 3,254.7 964.3 0.23 781.9 6,093.5 797.5 0.11 845.1 10,358.9 834.1 0.07 387.6 10,959.2 389.8 0.03 1,038.1 6,150.2 1,056.8 0.15 518.2 6,697.6 508.4 0.07

aG, gender; I, injury; L, location; S, seat-belt use.

Source:Data courtesy of Cristanna Cook, Medical Care Development, Augusta, Maine.

TABLE 8.9 Goodness-of-Fit Tests for Loglinear Models in Table 8.8

Model

G2

df

P-Value

ЕҪG, I, L, S.

2792.8

11

- 0.0001

ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS.

23.4

5

- 0.001

ЕҪGIL, GIS, GLS, ILS.

1.3

1

0.25

ЕҪGIL, GS, IS, LS. ЕҪGIS, GL, IL, LS. ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS. ЕҪ ILS, GI, GL, GS.

18.6

4

0.001

22.8

4

- 0.001

7.5

4

0.11

20.6

4

- 0.001

328

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 8.10 Estimated Conditional Odds Ratios for Models of Table 8.8

Odds Ratio

Loglinear Model

ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS.

ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS.

GI

0.58

0.58

IL

2.13

2.13

IS

0.44

0.44

GL S s no

1.23

1.33

S s yes

1.23

1.17

GS L s urban

0.63

0.66

L s rural

0.63

0.58

LS Gs female

1.09

1.17

Gs male

1.09

1.03

ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS., and ЕҪGIL, GIS, GLS, ILS. having all terms of varying complexity. Model ЕҪG, I, L, S. of mutual independence fits very poorly. Model ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS. fits much better but still has a lack of fit ЕҪ P - 0.001.. Model ЕҪGIL, GIS, GLS, ILS. fits well ЕҪG2 s 1.3, df s 1. but is

complex and difficult to interpret. This suggests studying models more complex than ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS. but simpler than ЕҪGIL, GIS, GLS, ILS..
First, however, we analyze model ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS., which focuses

on pairwise associations. Table 8.8 displays its fitted values. Table 8.10

reports the model-based estimated conditional odds ratios. One can obtain

them directly using the fitted values for partial tables relating two variables at

any combination of levels of the other two. They also follow directly from

parameter

estimates;

for instance,

0.44

s

expЕҪ

вҗӯЛҶIS
11

q

вҗӯЛҶIS 22

y

вҗӯЛҶIS y вҗӯЛҶIS ..

12

21

Since the sample size is large, the estimates of odds ratios are quite

precise. For instance, the standard error of the estimated IS conditional log

odds ratio of y0.814 is 0.028. A 95% Wald confidence interval for the true odds ratio is expwy0.814 " 1.96ЕҪ0.028.x or ЕҪ0.42, 0.47.. This model estimates

that the odds of injury for passengers wearing seat belts were less than half

the odds for passengers not wearing them, at each genderбҺҗlocation combina-

tion. The fitted odds ratios in Table 8.10 also suggest that other factors being

fixed, injury was more likely in rural than urban accidents and more likely for

females than for males. The estimated odds that males used seat belts were

only 0.63 times the estimated odds for females.

Interpretations are more complex for models containing three-factor inter-

action terms. Table 8.9 shows results of adding a single three-factor term to model ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS.. Of the four possible models, ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS. appears to fit best. Table 8.8 also displays its fit. Given the

large sample size, its G2 value suggests that it fits quite well. For model ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS., each pair of variables is conditionally depen-

dent, and at each category of I the association between any two of the others

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR HIGHER DIMENSIONS

329

varies across categories of the remaining variable. For this model, it is inappropriate to interpret the GL, GS, and LS two-factor terms on their own. Since I does not occur in a three-factor interaction, the conditional odds ratio between I and each variable ЕҪsee the top portion of Table 8.10. is the same at each combination of categories of the other two variables.
When a model has a three-factor interaction term but no term of higher order than that, one can study the interaction by calculating fitted odds ratios between two variables at each level of the third. One can do this at any levels of remaining variables not involved in the interaction. The bottom portion of Table 8.10 illustrates this for model ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS.. For instance, the fitted GS odds ratio of 0.66 for ЕҪ L s urban. refers to four fitted values for urban accidents, both the four with ЕҪinjury s no. and the four with ЕҪinjury s yes.; for example, 0.66 s ЕҪ7273.2 = 10,959.2.rЕҪ11,632.6 = 10,358.9..

8.4.3 Large Samples and Statistical versus Practical Significance
Model ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS. seems to fit much better than ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS.. The difference in G2 values of 23.4 y 7.5 s 15.9 has df s 5 y 4 s 1 ЕҪ P s 0.0001.. Table 8.10 indicates, however, that the degree of threefactor interaction is weak. The fitted odds ratio between any two of G, L, and S is similar at both levels of the third variable. The significantly better fit of model ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS. reflects mainly the enormous sample size.
As in any test, a statistically significant effect need not be practically important. With huge samples, it is crucial to focus on estimation rather than hypothesis testing. For instance, a comparison of fitted odds ratios for the two models in Table 8.10 suggests that the simpler model ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS. is adequate for most purposes.

8.4.4 Dissimilarity Index For a table of arbitrary dimension with cell counts Г„ni s npi4 and fitted
values Г„вҗ®ЛҶi s nвҗІЛҶi4, one can summarize the closeness of a model fit to the data
by the dissimilarity index ЕҪGini 1914.,

вҢ¬ЛҶ s Гқ ni y вҗ®ЛҶi r2 n s Гқ pi y вҗІЛҶi r2 .

i

i

This index falls between 0 and 1, with smaller values representing a better fit. It represents the proportion of sample cases that must move to different cells for the model to fit perfectly.
The dissimilarity index вҢ¬ЛҶ estimates a corresponding population index вҢ¬
describing model lack of fit. The value вҢ¬ s 0 occurs when the model holds perfectly. In practice, this is unrealistic for unsaturated models, and вҢ¬ ) 0.
The estimator вҢ¬ЛҶ helps study whether the lack of fit is important in a practical sense. When вҢ¬ЛҶ - 0.02 or 0.03, the sample data follow the model pattern

330

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

quite closely, even though the model is not perfect. When вҢ¬ is near 0, вҢ¬ЛҶ
tends to overestimate вҢ¬, substantially so for small n. Firth and Kuha ЕҪ2000.
provided an approximate variance for вҢ¬ЛҶ and studied ways to reduce its
estimation bias.
For Table 8.8, model ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS. has вҢ¬ЛҶ s 0.008, and model ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS. has вҢ¬ЛҶ s 0.003. For either model, moving less than 1% of
the data yields a perfect fit. The relatively large G2 value for ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS. indicated that it does not truly hold. Nevertheless,
the small вҢ¬ЛҶ value suggests that, in practical terms, it fits decently.

8.5 LOGLINEARбҺҗLOGIT MODEL CONNECTION
Loglinear models treat categorical response variables symmetrically, focusing on associations and interactions in their joint distribution. Logit models, by contrast, describe how a single categorical response depends on explanatory variables. The model types seem distinct, but connections exist between them. For a loglinear model, forming logits on one response helps to interpret the model. Moreover, logit models with categorical explanatory variables have equivalent loglinear models.

8.5.1 Using Logit Models to Interpret Loglinear Models

To understand implications of a loglinear model formula, it can help to form a logit on one variable. We illustrate with the loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ.. When Y is binary, its logit is

PЕҪY s 1 < X s i, Z s k. log P ЕҪ Y s 2 < X s i, Z s k .

s log s вҗ®i1k log вҗ®i1k y log вҗ®i2 k вҗ®i2 k
s ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯ1Y q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯi1X Y q вҗӯikX Z q вҗӯ1k Y Z . yЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯ2Y q вҗӯkZ q вҗӯi2X Y q вҗӯikX Z q вҗӯ2 k Y Z .
s ЕҪ вҗӯ1Y y вҗӯ2Y . q ЕҪ вҗӯX Y i1 y вҗӯi2X Y . q ЕҪ вҗӯY Z 1k y вҗӯY Z 2 k . .

The first parenthetical term is a constant, not depending on i or k. The second parenthetical term depends on the category i of X. The third parenthetical term depends on the category k of Z. This logit has the additive form

logit P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈ q вҗӨiX q вҗӨkZ.

ЕҪ 8 .15.

Using the notation summarizing logit models by their predictors, we denote it by ЕҪ X q Z..

LOGLINEARбҺҗLOGIT MODEL CONNECTION

331

In Section 5.4.1 we discussed this logit model. When Y is binary, the loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. is equivalent to it. The вҗӯikXZ terms for association among explanatory variables cancel in the difference in logarithms the
logit defines. The logit model does not study this association.

8.5.2 Auto Accident Example Revisited For the Maine auto accidents ЕҪTable 8.8., in Section 8.4.2 we showed that the loglinear model ЕҪGLS, GI, LI, IS.,

log

вҗ®gi l s

s вҗӯ q вҗӯgG

q вҗӯiI

q

вҗӯ

L l

q вҗӯsS

q вҗӯg iG I

q вҗӯg lG L

q вҗӯg s G S

q вҗӯi lIL q вҗӯi sIS q вҗӯ l sLS q вҗӯg l s G LS ,

fits well. It is natural to treat injury ЕҪ I . as a response variable and gender ЕҪG., location ЕҪ L., and seat-belt use ЕҪS. as explanatory variables, or perhaps S as a response with G and L as explanatory. One can show that this loglinear model is equivalent to logit model ЕҪG q L q S.,

logit P ЕҪ I s 1 < G s g , L s l , S s s.

s

вҗЈ

q

вҗӨgG

q

вҗӨ

L l

q

вҗӨsS

.

ЕҪ 8 .16.

For instance, the seat-belt effects in the two models satisfy вҗӨsS s вҗӯ1sIS y вҗӯ2 s IS.

In the logit calculation, all terms in the loglinear model not having the injury

index i cancel. Fitted values, goodness-of-fit statistics, residual df, and

standardized Pearson residuals for the logit model are identical to those for

the loglinear model.

Odds ratios describing effects on I relate to two-factor loglinear parame-

ters and main-effect logit parameters. In the logit model, the log odds ratio

for the effect of S on I equals вҗӨ1S y вҗӨ2S. This equals вҗӯ11IS q вҗӯ22IS y вҗӯ12IS y вҗӯ21IS

in the loglinear model. Their estimates are the same no matter how software

sets

up

constraints.

For

Table

8.8,

вҗӨЛҶS
1

y

вҗӨЛҶS
2

s

y0.817

for

the

logit

model,

and

вҗӯЛҶIS
11

q

вҗӯЛҶIS 22

y

вҗӯЛҶIS
12

y

вҗӯЛҶIS 21

s

y0.817

for

the

loglinear

model.

Loglinear models are GLMs that treat the 16 cell counts in Table 8.8 as 16

independent Poisson variates. Logit models are GLMs that treat the table as

binomial counts. Logit models with I as the response treat the marginal GLS table Г„ ngql s4 as fixed and regard Г„ ng1 l s4 as eight independent binomial variates on that response. Although the sampling models differ, the results

from fits of corresponding models are identical.

8.5.3 Correspondence between Loglinear and Logit Models
In the derivation of the logit model ЕҪ X q Z. wsee ЕҪ8.15.x from loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., the вҗӯikXZ term cancels. It might seem as if the model ЕҪ XY, YZ. omitting this term is also equivalent to that logit model. Indeed, forming the logit on Y for ЕҪ XY, YZ. results in the same logit formula. The loglinear

332

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 8.11 Equivalent Loglinear and Logit Models for a Three-Way Table with Binary Response Variable Y

Loglinear Symbol ЕҪY, XZ. ЕҪ XY, XZ. ЕҪYZ, XZ. ЕҪ XY, YZ, XZ. ЕҪ XYZ.

Logit Model
вҗЈ вҗЈ q вҗӨiX вҗЈ q вҗӨkZ вҗЈ q вҗӨiX q вҗӨkZ вҗЈ q вҗӨiX q вҗӨkZ qвҗӨikXZ

Logit Symbol ЕҪбҺҸ. ЕҪX. ЕҪZ. ЕҪX q Z. ЕҪ X *Z.

model that has the same fit as the logit model, however, contains a general interaction term for relationships among the explanatory variables. The logit model does not assume anything about relationships among explanatory variables, so it allows an arbitrary interaction pattern for them.
Table 8.11 summarizes equivalent logit and loglinear models for three-way tables when Y is a binary response. Each loglinear model contains the XZ association term relating the explanatory variables in the logit models. The simple loglinear model ЕҪY, XZ. states that Y is jointly independent of both X and Z, and is equivalent to the logit model having only an intercept. The saturated loglinear model ЕҪ XYZ. contains the three-factor interaction term. When Y is a binary response, this model is equivalent to a logit model with an interaction between the predictors X and Z. For instance, the effect of X on Y depends on Z, meaning that the XY odds ratio varies across its categories. That logit model is also saturated.
Analogous correspondences hold when Y has several categories, using baseline-category logit models. An advantage of the loglinear approach is its generality. It applies when more than one response variable exists. The alcoholбҺҗcigaretteбҺҗmarijuana example in Section 8.2.4, for instance, used loglinear models to study association patterns among three response variables. Loglinear models are most natural when at least two variables are response variables. When only one is a response, it is more sensible to use logit models directly.

8.5.4 Generalized Loglinear Model*
Let n s ЕҪ n1, . . . , nN .X and вҗ® s ЕҪвҗ®1, . . . , вҗ®N .X denote column vectors of observed and expected counts for the N cells of a contingency table, with n s Гқi ni. For simplicity we use a single index, but the table may be multidimensional. Loglinear models for positive Poisson means have the form

log вҗ® s XвҗӨ

ЕҪ 8 .17.

for model matrix X and column vector вҗӨ of model parameters.

MODEL FITTING: LIKELIHOOD EQUATIONS AND ASYMPTOTICS

333

We illustrate with the independence model, log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯYj , for a 2 = 2 table. With constraints вҗӯ2X s вҗӯ2Y s 0, it is

log вҗ®11

111 вҗӯ

s 1 log вҗ®12 1 1 0 вҗӯX .

log вҗ®21 log вҗ®

1 0 0 1 0 1 вҗӯ1Y

22

A generalization of ЕҪ8.17. allows many additional models. This generalized loglinear model is

C logЕҪAвҗ®. s XвҗӨ

ЕҪ 8 .18.

for matrices C and A. The ordinary loglinear model ЕҪ8.17. results when C and A are identity matrices. Other special cases include logit models for binary or multicategory responses.
For instance, the loglinear model of independence for a 2 = 2 table is equivalent to a model by which the logit for Y is the same in each row of X ЕҪsee Section 8.1.2.. That logit model has form ЕҪ8.18.: A is a 4 = 4 identity matrix, so Aвҗ® is the 4 = 1 vector вҗ® s ЕҪвҗ®11, вҗ®12 , вҗ®21, вҗ®22 .X; the product C logЕҪAвҗ®. forms the logit in row 1 and the logit in row 2 using

C s 1 y1 00

0 0; 1 y1

then X s ЕҪ1, 1.X is a 2 = 1 matrix, and вҗӨ is a single constant вҗЈ , so XвҗӨ forms a common value for those two logits.
In Chapters 10 and 11 we use the generalized loglinear model for models outside the classes of GLMs studied thus far. An example is modeling marginal distributions of multivariate responses.

8.6 LOGLINEAR MODEL FITTING: LIKELIHOOD EQUATIONS AND ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS*
In discussing the fitting of loglinear models, we first derive sufficient statistics and likelihood equations. We then present large-sample normal distributions for ML estimators of model parameters and cell probabilities. We illustrate results with models for three-way tables. For simplicity, derivations use the Poisson sampling model, which does not require a constraint on parameters such as the multinomial does.

334

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

8.6.1 Minimal Sufficient Statistics

For three-way tables, the joint Poisson probability that cell counts Г„Yi jk s ni jk4 is

eyвҗ® i jkвҗ®i jk n i jk

ЕҒЕҒЕҒ

,

i jk

ni jk!

where the product refers to all cells of the table. The kernel of the log likelihood is

LЕҪ вҗ®. s Гқ Гқ Гқ ni jk log вҗ®i jk y Гқ Гқ Гқ вҗ®i jk .

i jk

i jk

ЕҪ 8 .19.

For the general loglinear model ЕҪ8.12., this simplifies to

LЕҪ вҗ®. s nвҗӯ q Гқ niqqвҗӯiX q Гқ nqjq вҗӯjY q Гқ nqqk вҗӯkZ

i

j

k

q Гқ Гқ ni jqвҗӯi jX Y q Гқ Гқ niqk вҗӯikX Z q Гқ Гқ nqj k вҗӯjkY Z

ij

ik

jk

q Гқ Гқ Гқ ni jk вҗӯi jk X Y Z y Гқ Гқ Гқ expЕҪ вҗӯ q РёРёРё qвҗӯi jk X Y Z . .

i jk

i jk

ЕҪ 8 .20.

Since the Poisson distribution is in the exponential family, coefficients of

the parameters are sufficient statistics. For this saturated model, Г„ni jk4 are

coefficients of Г„ вҗӯX Y Z i jk 4, so there is no reduction of the data. For simpler

models, certain parameters are zero and ЕҪ8.20. simplifies. For instance, for

the model ЕҪ X, Y, Z. of mutual independence, sufficient statistics are the

coefficients

in

ЕҪ8.20.

of

Г„

вҗӯ

X i

4

,

Г„ вҗӯjY 4,

and

Г„ вҗӯZk 4.

These

are

Г„ niqq4,

Г„ nqjq 4,

and Г„ nqqk 4.

Table 8.12 lists minimal sufficient statistics for several loglinear models. Each one is the coefficient of the highest-order termЕҪs. in which a variable

appears. In fact, they are the marginal distributions for terms in the model

symbol. Simpler models use more condensed sample information. For instance, whereas ЕҪ X, Y, Z. uses only the single-factor marginal distributions, ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. uses the two-way marginal tables.

TABLE 8.12 Minimal Sufficient Statistics for Fitting Loglinear Models

Model ЕҪ X, Y, Z. ЕҪ XY, Z. ЕҪ XY, YZ. ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ.

Minimal Sufficient Statistics Г„niqq4, Г„nqjq 4, Г„nqqk 4 Г„ni jq4, Г„nqqk 4 Г„ni jq4, Г„nqj k4 Г„ni jq4, Г„niqk 4, Г„nqj k4

MODEL FITTING: LIKELIHOOD EQUATIONS AND ASYMPTOTICS

335

8.6.2 Likelihood Equations for Loglinear Models

The fitted values for a model are solutions to the likelihood equations. We derive likelihood equations using general representation ЕҪ8.17. for a loglinear model. For a vector of counts n with вҗ® s EЕҪn., the model is log вҗ® s XвҗӨ, for which logЕҪвҗ®i. s Гқj xi j вҗӨj for all i.
Extending ЕҪ8.19., for Poisson sampling the log likelihood is

LЕҪ вҗ®. s Гқ ni log вҗ®i y Гқ вҗ®i

i

i

Еҫ / Еҫ / s Гқ ni Гқ xi j вҗӨj y Гқ exp Гқ xi j вҗӨj .

i

j

i

j

ЕҪ 8 .21.

The sufficient statistic for вҗӨj is its coefficient, Гқi ni xi j. Since

Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁ exp Гқ xij вҗӨj

СЁвҗӨj

j

s xi jexp Гқ xi j вҗӨj s xi j вҗ®i ,
j

s СЁ LЕҪ вҗ®. Гқ ni xi j y Гқ вҗ®i xi j ,

СЁвҗӨj

i

i

j s 1,2, . . . , p.

The likelihood equations equate these derivatives to zero. They have the form

XX n s XXвҗ®ЛҶ .

ЕҪ 8 .22.

These equations equate the sufficient statistics to their expected values, a result obtained with GLM theory in ЕҪ4.29.. For models considered so far,
these sufficient statistics are the marginal tables in the model symbol. To illustrate, consider model ЕҪ XZ, YZ.. Its log likelihood is ЕҪ8.20. with
вҗӯX Y s вҗӯX Y Z s 0. The log-likelihood derivatives

СЁL СЁвҗӯikX Z s niqk y вҗ®iqk and

СЁL СЁвҗӯjkY Z s nqj k y вҗ®qj k

yield the likelihood equations

вҗ®ЛҶiqk s niqk вҗ®ЛҶqj k s nqj k

for all i and k, for all j and k.

ЕҪ 8 .23. ЕҪ 8 .24.

Derivatives with respect to lower-order terms yield equations implied by these ЕҪProblem 8.30.. For model ЕҪ XZ, YZ., the fitted values have the same XZ and YZ marginal totals as the observed data.

336

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

8.6.3 BirchвҖҷs Results for Loglinear Models For model ЕҪ XZ, YZ., from ЕҪ8.23., ЕҪ8.24., and Table 8.12, the minimal sufficient statistics are the ML estimates of the corresponding marginal distributions of expected frequencies. Equation ЕҪ8.22. gives the corresponding result for any loglinear model. Birch ЕҪ1963. showed that likelihood equations for loglinear models match minimal sufficient statistics to their expected values. Poisson GLM theory implied this result in ЕҪ4.29. and ЕҪ4.44.. Thus, fitted values for loglinear models are smoothed versions of the cell counts that match them in certain marginal distributions but have associations and interactions satisfying the model-implied patterns.
Birch showed that a unique set of fitted values both satisfy the model and match the data in the minimal sufficient statistics. Hence, if we find such a solution, it must be the ML solution. To illustrate, the independence model for a two-way table
log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY
has minimal sufficient statistics Г„niq4 and Г„nqj4. The likelihood equations are

вҗ®ЛҶiqs niq, вҗ®ЛҶqj s nqj , for all i and j.
The fitted values Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j s niqnqjrn4 satisfy these equations and also satisfy the
model. BirchвҖҷs result implies that they are the ML estimates.

8.6.4 Direct versus Iterative Calculation of Fitted Values To illustrate how to solve likelihood equations, we continue the analysis of model ЕҪ XZ, YZ.. From ЕҪ8.9., the model satisfies

вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqk вҗІqj k вҗІqqk

for all i , j, and k.

For Poisson sampling, the related formula uses expected frequencies. Setting вҗІ i jk s вҗ®i jkrn, this is Г„вҗ®i jk s вҗ®iqk вҗ®qjkrвҗ®qqk 4. The likelihood equations
ЕҪ8.23. and ЕҪ8.24. specify that ML estimates satisfy вҗ®ЛҶiqk s niqk and вҗ®ЛҶqjk s nqjk and thus also вҗ®ЛҶqqk s nqqk . Since ML estimates of functions of param-
eters are the same functions of the ML estimates of those parameters,

вҗ®ЛҶi jk s s вҗ®ЛҶiqk вҗ®ЛҶqj k niqk nqj k .

вҗ®ЛҶqqk

nqqk

This solution satisfies the model and matches the data in the sufficient statistics. Thus, it is the unique ML solution.

MODEL FITTING: LIKELIHOOD EQUATIONS AND ASYMPTOTICS

337

TABLE 8.13 Fitted Values for Loglinear Models in Three-Way Tables

Model a

Probabilistic Form

Fitted Value

ЕҪ X, Y, Z.
ЕҪ XY, Z.
ЕҪ XY, XZ.
ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. ЕҪ XYZ. aFormulas for models niqk nqjqrn.

вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqqвҗІqjq вҗІqqk
вҗІ i jk s вҗІ i jqвҗІqqk вҗІ i jk s вҗІ i jqвҗІ iqk
вҗІ iqq вҗІi jk s вҗәi jвҗҫjk вҗ»ik No restriction
not listed are obtained by

niqq nqjq nqqk

вҗ®ЛҶi jk s

2

n

вҗ®ЛҶi jk s ni jqnqqk
n

вҗ®ЛҶi jk s ni jqniqk
n iqq

Iterative methods ЕҪSection 8.7.

вҗ®ЛҶi jk s ni jk

symmetry; for example, for ЕҪ XZ, Y ., вҗ®ЛҶi jk s

Similar reasoning produces Г„вҗ®ЛҶi jk4 for all except one model in Table 8.12.
Table 8.13 shows formulas. That table also expresses Г„вҗІi jk4 in terms of marginal probabilities. These expressions and the likelihood equations deter-
mine the ML formulas, using the approach just described.
For models having explicit formulas for вҗ®ЛҶi jk , the estimates are said to be
direct. Many loglinear models do not have direct estimates. ML estimation
then requires iterative methods. Of models in Tables 8.12 and 8.13, the only one not having direct estimates is ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ.. Although the two-way
marginal tables are its minimal sufficient statistics, it is not possible to express Г„вҗІi jk4 directly in terms of Г„вҗІi jq4, Г„вҗІiqk 4, and Г„вҗІqjk4. Direct estimates do not exist for unsaturated models containing all two-factor associations. In
practice, it is not essential to know which models have direct estimates.
Iterative methods for models not having direct estimates also apply with
models that have direct estimates. Statistical software for loglinear models
uses such iterative methods for all cases.

8.6.5 Chi-Squared Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Model goodness-of-fit statistics compare fitted cell counts to sample counts. For Poisson GLMs, in Section 4.5.2 we showed that for models with an intercept term, the deviance equals the G2 statistic. With a fixed number of cells, G2 and X 2 have approximate chi-squared null distributions when expected frequencies are large. The df equal the difference in dimension between the alternative and null hypotheses. This equals the difference between the number of parameters in the general case and when the model holds.
We illustrate with model ЕҪ X, Y, Z., for multinomial sampling with probabilities Г„вҗІi jk4. In the general case, the only constraint is ГқiГқjГқkвҗІi jk s 1, so there are IJK y 1 parameters. For model ЕҪ X, Y, Z., Г„вҗІ i jk s вҗІ iqqвҗІqjq вҗІqqk 4 are determined by I y 1 of Г„вҗІ iqq4 ЕҪsince ГқiвҗІ iqqs 1., J y 1 of Г„вҗІqjq 4, and K y 1 of Г„вҗІqqk 4. Thus,
df s ЕҪ IJK y 1. y ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1. q ЕҪ K y 1. s IJK y I y J y K q 2.

338

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 8.14 Residual Degrees of Freedom for Loglinear Models for Three-Way Tables

Model ЕҪ X, Y, Z. ЕҪ XY, Z. ЕҪ XZ, Y . ЕҪYZ, X . ЕҪ XY, YZ. ЕҪ XZ, YZ. ЕҪ XY, XZ. ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. ЕҪ XYZ.

Degrees of Freedom
IJK y I y J y K q 2 ЕҪ K y 1.ЕҪ IJ y 1. ЕҪ J y 1.ЕҪ IK y 1. ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ JK y 1. JЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. K ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. IЕҪ J y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. 0

The same df formula applies for Poisson sampling. Then, the general case has IJK Г„вҗ®i jk4 parameters. The residual df equal the number of cells in the table minus the number of parameters in the Poisson loglinear model for Г„вҗ®i jk4. For instance, model ЕҪ X, Y, Z. has residual df s IJK y w1 q ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1. q ЕҪ K y 1.x, reflecting the single intercept parameter вҗӯ and constraints such as вҗӯIX s вҗӯJY s вҗӯKZ s 0. This equals the number of linearly independent parameters equated to zero in the saturated model to obtain the
given model. Table 8.14 shows df formulas for testing three-way loglinear
models.

8.6.6 Covariance Matrix of ML Parameter Estimators
To present large-sample distributions of ML parameter estimators, we return to general expression logЕҪвҗ®i. s Гқj xi j вҗӨj, from which we obtained the log-likelihood derivatives

s СЁ LЕҪ вҗ®. Гқ ni xi j y Гқ вҗ®i xi j ,

СЁвҗӨj

i

i

j s 1, 2, . . . , p.

The Hessian matrix of second partial derivatives has elements

СЁ 2LЕҪвҗ®.
СЁвҗӨ j СЁвҗӨk

s y Гқ xi j СЁвҗ®i
i СЁвҗӨk

ВҪ s y Гқ xi j СЁ

i

СЁвҗӨk

Еҫ / exp Гқ xih вҗӨh h

5 s y Гқ xij xik вҗ®i. i

Like logistic regression models, loglinear models are GLMs using the canonical link; thus this matrix does not depend on the observed data. The

MODEL FITTING: LIKELIHOOD EQUATIONS AND ASYMPTOTICS

339

information matrix, the negative of this matrix, is

I s XX diagЕҪ вҗ®. X,

where diagЕҪвҗ®. has the elements of вҗ® on the main diagonal.
For a fixed number of cells, as n в„ў Пұ, the ML estimator вҗӨЛҶ is asymptotically normal with mean вҗӨ and covariance matrix Iy1. Thus, for Poisson
sampling, the asymptotic covariance matrix

covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ . s XX diagЕҪ вҗ®. X y1 .

ЕҪ 8 .25.

Substituting ML fitted values and then taking square roots of diagonal
elements yields standard errors for вҗӨЛҶ. This also follows from the general
expression ЕҪ4.28. for GLMs, as noted in Section 4.4.7.

8.6.7 Connection between Multinomial and Poisson Loglinear Models
Similar asymptotic results hold with multinomial sampling. When Г„Yi, i s 1, . . . , N4 are independent Poisson random variables, the conditional distribution of Г„Yi4 given n s ГқiYi is multinomial with parameters Г„вҗІi s вҗ®ir ЕҪГқa вҗ®a.4. Birch ЕҪ1963. showed that ML estimates of loglinear model parameters are the same for multinomial sampling as for independent Poisson sampling. He showed that estimates are also the same for independent multinomial sampling, as long as the model contains a term for the marginal distribution fixed by the sampling design. To illustrate, suppose that at each combination of categories of X and Z, an independent multinomial sample occurs on Y. Then, Г„ niqk 4 are fixed. The model must contain вҗӯikXZ, so the
fitted values satisfy Г„вҗ®ЛҶiqk s niqk 4.
That separate inferential theory is unnecessary for multinomial loglinear models follows from the following argument. Express the Poisson loglinear model for Г„вҗ®i4 as

log вҗ®i s вҗӯ q x iвҗӨ ,

where ЕҪ1, x i. is row i of the model matrix X and ЕҪ вҗӯ, вҗӨX .X is the model parameter vector. The Poisson log likelihood is

L s LЕҪ вҗӯ, вҗӨ . s Гқ nilog вҗ®i y Гқ вҗ®i

i

i

s Гқ ni ЕҪ вҗӯ q x iвҗӨ. y Гқ expЕҪ вҗӯ q x iвҗӨ. s nвҗӯ q Гқ ni x iвҗӨ y вҗ¶ ,

i

i

i

where вҗ¶ s Гқi вҗ®i s Гқi expЕҪ вҗӯ q x iвҗӨ.. Since log вҗ¶ s вҗӯ q logwГқiexpЕҪx iвҗӨ.x, this

log likelihood has the form

ВҪ 5 L s LЕҪвҗ¶ , вҗӨ. s Гқ ni x iвҗӨ y nlog Гқ expЕҪx iвҗӨ.

i

i

q ЕҪ nlog вҗ¶ y вҗ¶ . . ЕҪ8.26.

340

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

Now вҗІi s вҗ®irЕҪГқa вҗ®a. s expЕҪ вҗӯ q x iвҗӨ.rwГқaexpЕҪ вҗӯ q x aвҗӨ.x, and expЕҪ вҗӯ. cancels in the numerator and denominator. Thus, the first term ЕҪin braces. on the right-hand side in ЕҪ8.26. is Гқni log вҗІi, which is the multinomial log likelihood, conditional on the total cell count n. Unconditionally, n s Гқi ni has a Poisson distribution with expectation Гқi вҗ®i s вҗ¶ , so the second term in ЕҪ8.26. is the Poisson log likelihood for n. Since вҗӨ enters only in the first term,
the ML estimator вҗӨЛҶ and its covariance matrix for the Poisson log likelihood
LЕҪ вҗӯ, вҗӨ. are identical to those for the multinomial log likelihood. The Poisson loglinear model has one more parameter ЕҪi.e., вҗӯ. than the multinomial loglinear model because of the random sample size. See Birch ЕҪ1963., Lang ЕҪ1996c., McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989, p. 211., and Palmgren ЕҪ1981. for details.
For a multinomial sample, we show in Section 14.4.1 that the estimated covariance matrix of loglinear parameter estimators is

$ЛҶ X

X

y1

covЕҪвҗӨ . s Г„X diagЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ . y вҗ®ЛҶ вҗ®ЛҶ rn X4 .

ЕҪ 8 .27.

The intercept вҗӯ from the Poisson model is not relevant, and X for the multinomial model deletes the column of X pertaining to it in the Poisson model.
A similar argument applies with several independent multinomial samples. Each log-likelihood term is a sum of components from different samples, but the Poisson log likelihood again decomposes into two parts. One part is a Poisson log likelihood for the independent sample sizes, and the other part is the sum of the independent multinomial log likelihoods. Palmgren ЕҪ1981. showed that conditional on observed marginal totals for explanatory variables, the asymptotic covariances for estimators of parameters involving the response are the same as for Poisson sampling. For a single multinomial sample, PalmgrenвҖҷs result implies that ЕҪ8.27. is identical to ЕҪ8.25. with the row and column referring to вҗӯ deleted. Birch ЕҪ1963. and Goodman ЕҪ1970. gave related results. Lang ЕҪ1996c. gave an elegant discussion of connections between multinomial and Poisson models. His results imply that the asymptotic variance of any linear contrast of estimated log means within a covariate level is identical for the two models.

8.6.8 Distribution of Probability Estimators
For multinomial sampling, the ML estimates of cell probabilities are вҗІЛҶ s вҗ®ЛҶ rn. We next give the asymptotic covЕҪ вҗІЛҶ .. Lang ЕҪ1996c. showed the asymptotic covariance matrix for вҗ®ЛҶ for Poisson sampling and its connection with covЕҪ вҗІЛҶ ..
The saturated model has вҗІЛҶ s p, the sample proportions. Under multino-
mial sampling, from ЕҪ3.7. and ЕҪ3.8., their covariance matrix is

covЕҪp. s diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІX rn.

ЕҪ 8 .28.

MODEL FITTING: LIKELIHOOD EQUATIONS AND ASYMPTOTICS

341

With I independent multinomial samples on a response variable with J categories, вҗІ and p consist of I sets of proportions, each having J y 1 nonredundant elements. Then, covЕҪp. is a block diagonal matrix. Each of the independent samples has a ЕҪ J y 1. = ЕҪ J y 1. block of form ЕҪ8.28., and the matrix contains zeros off the main diagonal of blocks.
Now assume an unsaturated model. Using the delta method we show in
Sections 14.2.2 and 14.4.1 that вҗІЛҶ has an asymptotic normal distribution
about вҗІ. The estimated covariance matrix equals
ВҪ 5 cov $ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . s cov $ЕҪp. X XXcov $ЕҪp. X X cov y1 X$ЕҪp. rn.

For a single multinomial sample, this expression equals
cov $ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . s ВҪ diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶX X XX ЕҪdiagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶX .X y1 XX diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶX 5rn.

For tables with many cells, it is not unusual to have a sample proportion of 0 in a cell. In this case the ordinary standard error is 0, which is unappealing. An advantage of fitting a model is that it typically has a positive fitted probability and standard error.

8.6.9 Uniqueness of ML Estimates
When all Г„ni ) 04, the ML estimates exist and are unique. To show this, for simplicity we use Poisson sampling. Suppose that the model is parameterized so that X has full rank. Birch ЕҪ1963. showed that the likelihood equations are soluble, by noting that the kernel of the Poisson log likelihood
LЕҪ вҗ®. s Гқ ЕҪ ni log вҗ®i y вҗ®i .
i
has individual terms converging to yПұ as logЕҪвҗ®i. в„ў "Пұ; thus, the log likelihood is bounded above and attains its maximum at finite values of the model parameters. It is stationary at this maximum, since it has continuous first partial derivatives.
Birch showed that the likelihood equations have a unique solution, and the likelihood is maximized at that point. He proved this by showing that the matrix of values Г„yСЁ 2LrСЁвҗӨhСЁвҗӨj4 wi.e., the information matrix XXdiag(вҗ®)Xx is nonsingular and nonnegative definite, and hence positive definite. Nonsingularity follows from X having full rank and the diagonal matrix having positive
elements Г„вҗ®i4. Any quadratic form cX XXdiag(вҗ®)Xc equals Гқiw'вҗ®i ЕҪГқj xi j cj.x2
G 0, so the matrix is also nonnegative definite.

342

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

8.7 LOGLINEAR MODEL FITTING: ITERATIVE METHODS AND THEIR APPLICATION*

When a loglinear model does not have direct estimates, iterative algorithms such as NewtonбҺҗRaphson can solve the likelihood equations. In this section we also present a simpler but more limited method, iteratiВ®e proportional fitting.

8.7.1 NewtonбҺҗRaphson Method

In Section 4.6.1 we introduced the NewtonбҺҗRaphson method. Referring to notation there, we identify LЕҪвҗӨ. as the log likelihood for Poisson loglinear models.
From ЕҪ8.21., let

Еҫ / Еҫ / LЕҪвҗӨ. s Гқ ni Гқ xih вҗӨh y Гқ exp Гқ xih вҗӨh .

i

h

i

h

Then

uj s s СЁ LЕҪ вҗӨ . Гқ ni xi j y Гқ вҗ®i xi j ,

СЁвҗӨj

i

i

hjk s s y СЁ 2LЕҪ вҗӨ . Гқ вҗ®i xi j xik ,

СЁвҗӨ j СЁвҗӨk

i

so that

ujЕҪt. s Гқ ЕҪ ni y вҗ®ЕҪt. i . xi j and hЕҪt. jk s y Гқ вҗ®ЕҪt. i xi j xik .

i

i

The t th approximation вҗ®ЕҪt. for вҗ®ЛҶ derives from вҗӨЕҪt. through вҗ®ЕҪt. s
expЕҪXвҗӨЕҪt... It generates the next value вҗӨЕҪtq1. using ЕҪ4.39., which in this context is

вҗӨЕҪtq1. s вҗӨЕҪt. q XXdiagЕҪвҗ®ЕҪt. .X y1XX ЕҪn y вҗ®ЕҪt. . .
This in turn produces вҗ®ЕҪtq1. , and so on. Alternatively, вҗӨЕҪtq1. can be expressed as

вҗӨЕҪtq1. s yЕҪ HЕҪt. . y1r ЕҪt. ,

ЕҪ 8 .29.

where rjЕҪt. s Гқ вҗ®iЕҪt. xi j log вҗ®ЕҪt. i q ЕҪ ni y вҗ®ЕҪt. i .rвҗ®ЕҪt. i . The expression in brackets
is the first term in the Taylor series expansion of log ni at log вҗ®iЕҪt..

LOGLNEAR MODEL FITTING: ITERATIVE METHODS

343

The iterative process begins with all вҗ®iЕҪ0. s ni, or with an adjustment such

as

вҗ®ЕҪ0. i s ni q

1 2

if

any

ni s 0.

Then

ЕҪ8.29.

produces

вҗӨЕҪ1.,

and

for

t)0

the

iterations proceed as just described with Г„ni4. For loglinear models LЕҪвҗӨ. is

concave, and вҗ®ЕҪt. and вҗӨЕҪt. usually converge rapidly to the ML estimates вҗ®ЛҶ

and вҗӨЛҶ as t increases. The HЕҪt. matrix converges to HЛҶ s yXXdiagЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ .X. By

ЕҪ8.25., the estimated large-sample covariance matrix of вҗӨЛҶ is yHЛҶy1, a

by-product of the method. As we discussed in Section 4.6.3 for GLMs, ЕҪ8.29. has the iterative

reweighted least squares form

ЕҪ tq1.

X ЛҶy1 y1 X ЛҶy1 ЕҪt.

вҗӨ s ЕҪX Vt X. X Vt z .

Here, zЕҪt. has elements ni s log вҗ®ЕҪt. i q ЕҪ ni y вҗ®ЕҪt. i .rвҗ®ЕҪt. i and VЛҶt s
wdiagЕҪвҗ®ЕҪt..xy1. Thus, вҗӨЕҪtq1. is the weighted least squares solution for a model

zЕҪt. s XвҗӨ q в‘Җ , where Г„в‘Җi4 are uncorrelated with variances Г„1rвҗ®ЕҪit.4. With Г„вҗ®ЕҪ0. i s ni4, вҗӨЕҪ1. is the weighted least squares estimate for model logЕҪn. s XвҗӨ q в‘Җ.

8.7.2 Iterative Proportional Fitting The iteratiВ®e proportional fitting ЕҪIPF. algorithm is a simple method for
calculating Г„вҗ®ЛҶi4 for loglinear models. Introduced by Deming and Stephan
ЕҪ1940., it has the following steps:

1. Start with Г„вҗ®ЕҪ0. i 4 satisfying a model no more complex than the one being fitted. For instance, Г„вҗ®ЕҪ0. i ' 1.04 are trivially adequate.
2. By multiplying by appropriate factors, adjust Г„вҗ®ЕҪ0. i 4 successively to match each marginal table in the set of minimal sufficient statistics.
3. Continue until the maximum difference between the sufficient statistics and their fitted values is sufficiently close to zero.

We illustrate using model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ.. Its minimal sufficient statistics are Г„ ni jq4, Г„ niqk 4, and Г„ nqjk4. Initial estimates must satisfy the model. The first cycle of the IPF algorithm has three steps:

вҗ®i jk ЕҪ1. s вҗ®i jk ЕҪ0. ЕҪ0. ni jq , вҗ®i jq

вҗ®i jk ЕҪ2. s вҗ®i jk ЕҪ1. ЕҪ1. niqk , вҗ®iqk

вҗ®i jk ЕҪ3. s вҗ®i jk ЕҪ2. ЕҪ2. nqj k . вҗ®qj k

Summing both sides of the first expression over k shows that вҗ®i jq ЕҪ1. s ni jq for all i and j. After step 1, observed and fitted values match in the XY marginal table. After step 2, all вҗ®iqk ЕҪ2. s niqk , but the XY marginal tables no longer match. After step 3, all вҗ®qjk ЕҪ3. s nqjk , but the XY and XZ marginal tables no

344

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

longer match. A new cycle begins by again matching the XY marginal tables,

using

вҗ®i jk ЕҪ4.

s

вҗ®ЕҪ3. ЕҪ n rвҗ®ЕҪ3. .,
i jk i jq i jq

and

so

on.

At each step, the updated estimates continue to satisfy the model. For

instance,

step

1

uses

the

same

adjustment

factor

ЕҪ n rвҗ®ЕҪ0. .
i jq i jq

at

different

levels k of Z. Thus, XY odds ratios from different levels of Z have ratio

equal to 1, and the homogeneous association pattern continues at each step.

As the cycles progress, the G2 statistic comparing cell counts to the updated fit is monotone decreasing, and the process must converge ЕҪFienberg 1970a; Haberman 1974a.. The IPF algorithm produces ML estimates because

it generates a sequence of fitted values converging to a solution that both

satisfies the model and matches the sufficient statistics. By BirchвҖҷs results ЕҪSection 8.6.3., only one such solution exists, and it is ML.

The IPF method works even for models having direct estimates. Then, IPF normally yields ML estimates within one cycle ЕҪHaberman 1974a, p. 197.. We

illustrate with the model of independence. The minimal sufficient statistics are Г„ niq4 and Г„ nqj4. With Г„вҗ®ЕҪ0. i j ' 1.04, the first cycle gives

вҗ®i jЕҪ1. s вҗ®i jЕҪ0. ЕҪ0. s niq niq ,

вҗ®iq

J

вҗ®i jЕҪ2. s вҗ®i jЕҪ1. ЕҪ1. s nqj niqnqj .

вҗ®qj

n

The

IPF

algorithm

then

gives

вҗ®ЛҶЕҪi

t. j

s

n iq nqj rn

for

all

t ) 2.

8.7.3 Comparison of Iterative Methods
The IPF algorithm is simple and easy to implement. It converges to the ML fit even when the likelihood is poorly behaved, for instance with zero fitted counts and estimates on the boundary of the parameter space. The NewtonбҺҗRaphson method is more complex, requiring solving a system of equations at each step. NewtonбҺҗRaphson is sometimes not feasible when the model is of high dimensionalityбҺҸfor instance, when the contingency table and parameter vector are huge.
However, IPF has disadvantages. It is applicable primarily to models for which likelihood equations equate observed and fitted counts in marginal tables. By contrast, NewtonбҺҗRaphson is a general-purpose method that can solve more complex likelihood equations. IPF sometimes converges slowly compared to NewtonбҺҗRaphson. Unlike NewtonбҺҗRaphson, IPF does not produce the model parameter estimates and their estimated covariance matrix as a by-product. Fitted values that IPF produces can generate this
information. Model parameter estimates are contrasts of Г„log вҗ®ЛҶi4 ЕҪsee Problems 8.16 and 8.17., and substituting fitted values into ЕҪ8.25. yields covЕҪвҗӨЛҶ ..
Because NewtonбҺҗRaphson applies to a wide variety of models and also yields standard errors, it is the fitting routine used by most software for

LOGLNEAR MODEL FITTING: ITERATIVE METHODS

345

loglinear models. IPF is increasingly viewed as primarily of historical interest. However, for some applications the analysis is more transparent using IPF, as the next example illustrates.

8.7.4 Contingency Table Standardization

Table 8.15 relates education and attitudes toward legalized abortion using a General Social Survey, conducted by the National Opinion Research Center. To make patterns of association clearer, Smith ЕҪ1976. standardized the table so that all row and column marginal totals equal 100 while maintaining the sample odds ratio structure.
The IPF routine to standardize with margins of 100 is

вҗ®i jЕҪ0. s ni j

and then for t s 1, 3, 5, . . . ,

ЕҪt. ЕҪty1. 100

вҗ®i j s вҗ®i j

ЕҪ ty1. ,

вҗ®iq

ЕҪ tq1.

ЕҪt. 100

вҗ®i j s вҗ®i j ЕҪt. .

вҗ®qj

At the end of each odd-numbered step, all row totals equal 100. At the end of each even-numbered step, all column totals equal 100. Odds ratios do not change at each odd ЕҪeven. step, since all counts in a given row ЕҪcolumn. multiply by the same constant.
The IPF algorithm converges to the entries in parentheses in Table 8.15. The association is clearer in this standardized table. A ridge appears down the main diagonal, with higher levels of education having more favorable attitudes about abortion. The other counts fall away smoothly on both sides.
Table standardization is useful for comparing tables having different marginal structures. Mosteller ЕҪ1968. compared intergenerational occupa-

TABLE 8.15 Marginal Standardization of Attitudes toward Abortion by Years of Schooling

Attitude toward Legalized Abortion

Schooling

Generally Disapprove

Middle Position

Generally Approve

Less than high school High school More than high school
Total Source: Smith ЕҪ1976..

209 ЕҪ49.4.
151 ЕҪ32.8.
16 ЕҪ17.8. ЕҪ100.

101 ЕҪ32.0.
126 ЕҪ36.6.
21 ЕҪ31.3. ЕҪ100.

237 ЕҪ18.6.
426 ЕҪ30.6.
138 ЕҪ50.9. ЕҪ100.

Total ЕҪ100. ЕҪ100. ЕҪ100.

346

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

tional mobility tables from Britain and Denmark. Yule ЕҪ1912. compared three hospitals on vaccination and recovery for smallpox patients. A modern application is adjusting sample data to match marginal distributions specified by census results.
The process of table standardization is called raking the table. Imrey et al. ЕҪ1981. and Little and Wu ЕҪ1991. derived the asymptotic covariance matrix for raked sample proportions. For sample counts Г„ ni j4 with Г„вҗ®i j s EЕҪ ni j.4, let
Г„ Ei j4 denote expected frequencies for the standardized table and Г„ EЛҶi j4 fitted
values in the standardized table. The standardization process corresponds to fitting the model
logЕҪ Ei jrвҗ®i j . s вҗӯ q вҗӯiE q вҗӯjA .

That is, maintaining the odds ratios means that the two-way tables of
Г„ Ei jrвҗ®i j4 and of Г„ EЛҶi jrni j4 satisfy independence. The fitted values Г„ EЛҶi j4 in the standardized table satisfy

log EЛҶi j y log ni j s вҗӯЛҶ q вҗӯЛҶEi q вҗӯЛҶjA.

The adjustment term, ylog ni j, to the log link of the fit is called an offset. The fit corresponds to using log ni j as a predictor on the right-hand side and forcing its coefficient to equal 1.0. Standard GLM software can fit models
having offsets. To rake a table, one enters as sample data pseudo-values that
satisfy independence and have the desired margins, taking log ni j as an offset. ЕҪFor SAS, see Table A.14.. In Section 9.7.1 we discuss further the use
of model offsets.

NOTES
Section 8.2: Loglinear Models for Independence and Interaction in Three-Way Tables
8.1. Roy and Mitra ЕҪ1956. discussed types of independence for three-way tables and their large-sample tests. BirchвҖҷs ЕҪ1963. article on ML estimation for loglinear models was part of substantial research on loglinear models in the 1960s, much due to L. A. Goodman ЕҪsee Section 16.4.. Haberman ЕҪ1974a. presented an influential theoretical study of loglinear models.
Section 8.3: Inference for Loglinear Models
8.2. Goodman ЕҪ1970, 1971b., Haberman ЕҪ1974a, Chap. 5., Lauritzen ЕҪ1996., Sundberg ЕҪ1975., and Whittaker ЕҪ1990, Sec. 12.4. discussed families of loglinear models that have direct ML estimates and interpretations in terms of independence, conditional independence, or equiprobability. Such models are called decomposable, since expected frequencies decompose into products and ratios of expected marginal sufficient statistics. Haberman proved conditions under which loglinear models have direct estimates. Baglivo et al. ЕҪ1992., Forster et al. ЕҪ1996., and Morgan and Blumenstein ЕҪ1991. discussed exact inference.

PROBLEMS

347

8.3. For methods that allow for misclassification error, see Kuha and Skinner ЕҪ1997. and Kuha et al. ЕҪ1998. and references therein. For treatment of missing data, see Little ЕҪ1998., Schafer ЕҪ1997, Chap. 8., and their references.

Section 8.7: Loglinear Model Fitting: IteratiВ©e Methods and Their Application
8.4. Deming ЕҪ1964, Chap. VII. described early work on IPF by Deming and Stephan. Darroch ЕҪ1962. used IPF to obtain ML estimates in contingency tables. Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975., Fienberg ЕҪ1970a., and Speed ЕҪ1998. presented other applications of IPF. Darroch and Ratcliff ЕҪ1972. generalized IPF for models in which sufficient statistics are more complex than marginal tables.
8.5. For further discussion of table raking, see Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, pp. 76бҺҗ102., Fleiss ЕҪ1981, Chap. 14., Haberman ЕҪ1979, Chap. 9., Hoem ЕҪ1987., and Little and Wu ЕҪ1991..

PROBLEMS
Applications
8.1 The 1988 General Social Survey compiled by the National Opinion Research Center asked: вҖҳвҖҳDo you support or oppose the following measures to deal with AIDS? ЕҪ1. Have the government pay all of the health care costs of AIDS patients; ЕҪ2. Develop a government information program to promote safe sex practices, such as the use of condoms.вҖҷвҖҷ Table 8.16 summarizes opinions about health care costs ЕҪ H . and the information program ЕҪ I ., classified also by the respondentвҖҷs gender ЕҪG.. a. Fit loglinear models ЕҪGH, GI ., ЕҪGH, HI ., ЕҪGI, HI ., and ЕҪGH, GI, HI .. Show that models that lack the HI term fit poorly. b. For model ЕҪGH, GI, HI ., show that 95% Wald confidence intervals equal ЕҪ0.55, 1.10. for the GH conditional odds ratio and ЕҪ0.99, 2.55. for the GI conditional odds ratio. Interpret. Is it plausible that gender has no effect on opinion for these issues?

TABLE 8.16 Data for Problem 8.1

Gender

Information Opinion

Health Opinion

Support

Oppose

Male

Support Oppose

76

160

6

25

Female

Support

114

181

Oppose

11

48

Source: 1988 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

348

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 8.17 Data for Problem 8.2a

President

Busing

Home

1

2

3

1

1

2

3

2

1

2

3

3

1

2

3

a1, Yes; 2, no; 3, donвҖҷt know.

Source: 1991 General Social Center.

41

65

71

157

1

17

2

5

3

44

1

0

0

3

0

10

0

0

Survey, National Opinion

0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1
Research

8.2 Refer to Table 8.17 from the 1991 General Social Survey. White subjects were asked: ЕҪ B. вҖҳвҖҳDo you favor busing of ЕҪNegrorBlack. and white school children from one school district to another?вҖҷвҖҷ, ЕҪ P. вҖҳвҖҳIf your party nominated a ЕҪNegrorBlack. for President, would you vote for him if he were qualified for the job?вҖҷвҖҷ, ЕҪ D. вҖҳвҖҳDuring the last few years, has anyone in your family brought a friend who was a ЕҪNegrorBlack. home for dinner?вҖҷвҖҷ The response scale for each item was ЕҪyes, no, donвҖҷt know.. Fit model ЕҪ BD, BP, DP..
a. Using the yes and no categories, estimate the conditional odds ratio for each pair of variables. Interpret.
b. Analyze the modelвҖҷs goodness of fit. Interpret.
c. Conduct inference for the BP conditional association using a Wald or likelihood-ratio confidence interval and test. Interpret.

8.3 Refer to Section 8.3.2. Explain why software for which parameters sum

to

zero

across

levels

of

each

index

reports

вҗӯЛҶAC
11

s

вҗӯЛҶ A C 22

s

0.514

and

вҗӯЛҶAC
12

s

вҗӯЛҶ A C 21

s

y0.514,

with

SE

s

0.044

for

each

term.

8.4 Refer to Table 2.6. Let D s defendantвҖҷs race, V s victimsвҖҷ race, and P s death penalty verdict. Fit the loglinear model ЕҪ DV, DP, PV ..
a. Using the fitted values, estimate and interpret the odds ratio between D and P at each level of V. Note the common odds ratio property.
b. Calculate the marginal odds ratio between D and P, ЕҪi. using the fitted values, and ЕҪii. using the sample data. Why are they equal? Contrast the odds ratio with part ЕҪa.. Explain why SimpsonвҖҷs paradox occurs.

PROBLEMS

349

TABLE 8.18 Data for Problem 8.5

Safety Equipment in Use

Whether Ejected

Injury

Nonfatal

Fatal

Seat belt None

Yes

1,105

14

No

411,111

483

Yes

4,624

497

No

157,342

1,008

Source: Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.

c. Fit the corresponding logit model, treating P as the response. Show the correspondence between parameter estimates and fit statistics.
d. Is there a simpler model that fits well? Interpret, and show the logitбҺҗloglinear connection.
8.5 Table 8.18 refers to automobile accident records in Florida in 1988. a. Find a loglinear model that describes the data well. Interpret associations. b. Treating whether killed as the response, fit an equivalent logit model. Interpret the effects. c. Since n is large, goodness-of-fit statistics are large unless the model fits very well. Calculate the dissimilarity index for the model in part ЕҪa., and interpret.
8.6 Refer to Table 8.19. Subjects were asked their opinions about government spending on the environment ЕҪ E., health ЕҪ H ., assistance to big cities ЕҪC., and law enforcement ЕҪ L..

TABLE 8.19 Data for Problem 8.6 a

Law Environment Health Enforcement:

Cities

1

2

3

1 23 1 23 1 2 3

1

1

2

3

62 17 5 90 42 3 74 31 11 11 7 0 22 18 1 19 14 3 2 31 2 01 1 3 1

2

1

2

3

11 3 0 21 13 2 20 8 3 1 40 6 90 6 5 2 1 01 2 11 4 3 1

3

1

3 00 2 10 9 2 1

2

1 00 2 10 4 2 0

3

1 00 0 00 1 2 3

a1, Too little; 2, about right; 3, too much.

Source: 1989 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

350

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

TABLE 8.20 Output for Fitting Model to Table 8.19

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Value / DF

Deviance

48

31.6695

0.6598

Pearson Chi- Square

48

26.5224

0.5526

Log Likelihood

1284.9404

Standard

Wald 95%

Chi-

Parameter

DF Estimate Error Confidence Limits Square

e*h

11 1

2.1425 0.5566

1.0515 3.2335 14.81

e*h

12 1

1.4221 0.6034

0.2394 2.6049 5.55

e*h

21 1

0.7294 0.5667

y0.3813 1.8402 1.66

e*h

22 1

0.3183 0.6211

y0.8991 1.5356 0.26

e*l

1 1 1 y0.1328 0.6378

y1.3829 1.1172 0.04

e*l

12 1

0.3739 0.6975

y0.9931 1.7410 0.29

e*l

2 1 1 y0.2630 0.6796

y1.5949 1.0689 0.15

e*l

22 1

0.4250 0.7361

y1.0178 1.8678 0.33

e*c

11 1

1.2000 0.5177

0.1854 2.2147 5.37

e*c

12 1

1.3896 0.4774

0.4540 2.3253 8.47

e*c

21 1

0.6917 0.5605

y0.4068 1.7902 1.52

e*c

22 1

1.3767 0.5024

0.3921 2.3614 7.51

h*c

1 1 1 y0.1865 0.4547

y1.0777 0.7048 0.17

h*c

12 1

0.7464 0.4808

y0.1959 1.6886 2.41

h*c

2 1 1 y0.4675 0.4978

y1.4431 0.5081 0.88

h*c

22 1

0.7293 0.5023

y0.2553 1.7138 2.11

h*l

11 1

1.8741 0.5079

0.8786 2.8696 13.61

h*l

12 1

1.0366 0.5262

0.0052 2.0680 3.88

h*l

21 1

1.9371 0.6226

0.7168 3.1574 9.68

h*l

22 1

1.8230 0.6355

0.5775 3.0686 8.23

c*l

11 1

0.8735 0.4604

y0.0289 1.7760 3.60

c*l

12 1

0.5707 0.4863

y0.3824 1.5239 1.38

c*l

21 1

1.0793 0.4326

0.2314 1.9271 6.23

c*l

22 1

1.2058 0.4462

0.3312 2.0804 7.30

a. Table 8.20 shows some results, including the two-factor estimates, for the homogeneous association model. Check the fit, and interpret.
b. All estimates at category 3 of each variable equal 0. Report the estimated conditional odds ratios using the too much and too little categories for each pair of variables. Summarize the associations. Based on these results, which termЕҪs. might you consider dropping from the model? Why?
c. Table 8.21 reports Г„вҗӯЛҶEH eh 4 when parameters sum to zero within rows
and within columns, and when parameters are zero in the first row and first column. Show how these yield the estimated EH conditional odds ratio for the too much and too little categories. Compare to part ЕҪb.. Construct a confidence interval for that odds ratio. Interpret.

PROBLEMS

351

TABLE 8.21 Parameter Estimates for Problem 8.6

Sum to Zero Constraints H

Zero for First Level H

E

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

0.509

0.166

y0.676

0

0

0

2

y0.065

y0.099

0.163

0

0.309

1.413

3

y0.445

y0.068

0.513

0

0.720

2.142

8.7 Refer to the loglinear models for Table 8.8. a. Explain why the fitted odds ratios in Table 8.10 for model ЕҪGI, GL, GS, IL, IS, LS. suggest that the most likely accident case for injury is females not wearing seat belts in rural locations. b. Fit model ЕҪGLS, GI, IL, IS.. Using model parameter estimates, show that the fitted IS conditional odds ratio equals 0.44. Show that for each injury level, the estimated conditional LS odds ratio is 1.17 for ЕҪG s female. and 1.03 for ЕҪG s male.. How can you get these using the model parameter estimates?
8.8 Consider the following two-stage model for Table 8.8. The first stage is a logit model with S as the response for the three-way GLS table. The second stage is a logit model with these three variables as predictors for I in the four-way table. Explain why this composite model is sensible, fit the models, and interpret results.
8.9 Refer to the logit model in Problem 5.24. Let A s opinion on abortion. a. Give the symbol for the loglinear model that is equivalent to this logit model. b. Which logit model corresponds to loglinear model ЕҪ AR, AP, GRP.? c. State the equivalent loglinear and logit models for which ЕҪi. A is jointly independent of G, R, and P; ЕҪii. there are main effects of R on A, but A is conditionally independent of G and P, given R; ЕҪiii. there is interaction between P and R in their effects on A, and G has main effects.
8.10 For a multiway contingency table, when is a logit model more appropriate than a loglinear model? When is a loglinear model more appropriate?
8.11 Using software, conduct the analyses described in this chapter for the student survey data ЕҪTable 8.3..

352

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

8.12 Standardize Table 10.6. Describe the migration patterns.
8.13 The bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html. has a 2 = 3 = 2 = 2 table relating responses on frequency of attending religious services, political views, opinion on making birth control available to teenagers, and opinion about a man and woman having sexual relations before marriage. Analyze these data using loglinear models.

Theory and Methods 8.14 Suppose that Г„вҗ®i j s nвҗІi j4 satisfy the independence model ЕҪ8.1..
a. Show that вҗӯaY y вҗӯbY s log ЕҪвҗІqarвҗІqb .. b. Show that Г„all вҗӯjY s 04 is equivalent to вҗІqj s 1rJ for all j.

8.15 Refer to the independence model, вҗ®i j s вҗ®вҗЈi вҗӨj. For the corresponding loglinear model ЕҪ8.1.: a. Show that one can constrain ГқвҗӯiX s ГқвҗӯYj s 0 by setting

Еҫ / Еҫ / вҗӯiX s log вҗЈi y Гқ log вҗЈh I, вҗӯjY s log вҗӨj y Гқ log вҗӨh J,

h

h

Еҫ / Еҫ / вҗӯ s log вҗ® q Гқ log вҗЈh I q Гқ log вҗӨh J.

h

h

b. Show that one can constrain вҗӯ1X s вҗӯ1Y s 0 by defining вҗӯiX s log вҗЈi y log вҗЈ1 and вҗӯjY s log вҗӨj y log вҗӨ1. Then, what does вҗӯ equal?

8.16 For an I = J table, let вҗ©i j s log вҗ®i j, and let a dot subscript denote the mean for that index ЕҪe.g., вҗ©i.s Гқjвҗ©i jrJ .. Then, let вҗӯ s вҗ©. . , вҗӯiX s вҗ©i.y вҗ©. . , вҗӯjY s вҗ©. j y вҗ©. . , and вҗӯi jX Y s вҗ©i j y вҗ©i.y вҗ©. j q вҗ©. . .

a. Show that log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӯi jX Y. Hence, any set of positive Г„вҗ®i j4 satisfies the saturated model.
b. Show that Гқi вҗӯiX s Гқj вҗӯjY s Гқi вҗӯi jX Y s Гқ j вҗӯi jX Y s 0.

c. For 2 = 2 tables, show that log вҗӘ s 4вҗӯX Y 11 . d. For 2 = J tables, show that вҗӯ11X Y s ЕҪГқj log вҗЈj.r2 J,
вҗ®11 вҗ®2 jrвҗ®21 вҗ®1 j, j s 2, . . . , J.

where

вҗЈj s

e. Alternative constraints have other odds ratio formulas. Let вҗӯ s вҗ©11, вҗӯiX s вҗ©i1 y вҗ©11, вҗӯjY s вҗ©1 j y вҗ©11, and вҗӯi jX Y s вҗ©i j y вҗ©i1 y вҗ©1 j q вҗ©11. Then, show that the saturated model holds with вҗӯX1 s вҗӯY1 s вҗӯX Y 1 j s вҗӯi1X Y s 0 for all i and j, and вҗӯi jX Y s logЕҪвҗ®11 вҗ®i jrвҗ®1 j вҗ®i1..

PROBLEMS

353

8.17 Suppose that all вҗ®i jk ) 0. Let вҗ©i jk s log вҗ®i jk , and consider model parameters with zero-sum constraints. a. For the general loglinear model ЕҪ8.12., define parameters in the fashion of Problem 8.16 ЕҪe.g., вҗӯi jX Y s вҗ©i j.y вҗ©i. .y вҗ©. j.q вҗ©. . ... b. For model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. with a 2 = 2 = 2 table, show that вҗӯ11X Y s 41 log вҗӘ 11ЕҪ k.. c. For ЕҪ XYZ. with a 2 = 2 = 2 table, show that

вҗӯ111 X Y Z s 81 log вҗӘ 11ЕҪ1.rвҗӘ 11ЕҪ2. .

Thus, вҗӯi jk X Y Z s 0 is equivalent to вҗӘ11ЕҪ1. s вҗӘ11ЕҪ2..
8.18 Two balanced coins are flipped, independently. Let X s whether the first flip resulted in a head ЕҪyes, no., Y s whether the second flip resulted in a head, and Z s whether both flips had the same result. Using this example, show that marginal independence for each pair of three variables does not imply that the variables are mutually independent.

8.19 For three categorical variables X, Y, and Z:
a. When Y is jointly independent of X and Z, show that X and Y are conditionally independent, given Z.
b. Prove that mutual independence of X, Y, and Z implies that X and Y are both marginally and conditionally independent.
c. When X is independent of Y and Y is independent of Z, does it follow that X is independent of Z? Explain.
d. When any pair of variables is conditionally independent, explain why there is no three-factor interaction.

8.20 Suppose that X and Y are conditionally independent, given Z, and X and Z are marginally independent. a. Show that X is jointly independent of Y and Z. b. Show X and Y are marginally independent. c. Show that if X and Z are conditionally ЕҪrather than marginally. independent, then X and Y are still marginally independent.
8.21 A 2 = 2 = 2 table satisfies вҗІ iqqs вҗІqjqs вҗІqqk s 21 , all i, j, k. Give an example of Г„вҗІi jk4 that satisfies model ЕҪa. ЕҪ X, Y, Z., ЕҪb. ЕҪ XY, Z., ЕҪc. ЕҪ XY, YZ., ЕҪd. ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., and ЕҪe. ЕҪ XYZ., but in each case not a simpler model.
8.22 Suppose that model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. holds in a 2 = 2 = 2 table, and the common XY conditional log odds ratio at the two levels of Z is

354

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

positive. If the XZ and YZ conditional log odds ratios are both positive or both negative, show that the XY marginal odds ratio is larger than the XY conditional odds ratio. Hence, SimpsonвҖҷs paradox cannot occur for the XY association.

Еҫ / Еҫ / 8.23 Show that the general loglinear model in T dimensions has 2T terms.

w Hint: It has an intercept,

T 1

single-factor terms,

T 2

two-factor

terms, . . . .x

8.24 Each of T responses is binary. For dummy variables Г„ z1, . . . , zT 4, the loglinear model of mutual independence has the form

log вҗ®z1, . . . , zT s вҗӯ1 z1 q РёРёРё qвҗӯT zT . Show how to express the general loglinear model ЕҪCox 1972..

8.25 Consider a cross-classification of W, X, Y, Z. a. Explain why ЕҪWXZ, WYZ. is the most general loglinear model for which X and Y are conditionally independent.
b. State the model symbol for which X and Y are conditionally independent and there is no three-factor interaction.

8.26 For a four-way table with binary response Y, give the equivalent loglinear and logit models that have: a. Main effects of A, B, and C on Y. b. Interaction between A and B in their effects on Y, and C has main effects. c. Repeat part ЕҪa. for a nominal response Y with a baseline-category logit model.
8.27 For a 3 = 3 table with ordered rows having scores Г„ xi4, identify all terms in the generalized loglinear model ЕҪ8.18. for models ЕҪa. logitw PЕҪY F j.x s вҗЈj q вҗӨ xi, and ЕҪb. logw PЕҪY s j.rPЕҪY s 3.x s вҗЈj q вҗӨj xi.
8.28 For the independence model for a two-way table, derive minimal sufficient statistics, likelihood equations, fitted values, and residual df.
8.29 For the loglinear model for an I = J table, log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX, show
that вҗ®ЛҶi j s niqrJ and residual df s IЕҪ J y 1..
8.30 Write the log likelihood L for model ЕҪ XZ, YZ.. Calculate СЁ LrСЁвҗӯ and
show that it implies вҗ®ЛҶqqqs n. Show that СЁ LrСЁвҗӯiX s niqqy вҗ®iqq.

PROBLEMS

355

Similarly, differentiate with respect to each parameter to obtain likelihood equations. Show ЕҪ8.23. and ЕҪ8.24. imply the other equations, so those equations determine the ML estimates.
8.31 For model ЕҪ XY, Z., derive ЕҪa. minimal sufficient statistics, ЕҪb. likelihood equations, ЕҪc. fitted values, and ЕҪd. residual df for tests of fit.
8.32 Consider the loglinear model with symbol ЕҪ XZ, YZ..
a. For fixed k, show that Г„вҗ®ЛҶi jk4 equal the fitted values for testing
independence between X and Y within level k of Z. b. Show that the Pearson and likelihood-ratio statistics for testing this
modelвҖҷs fit have form X 2 s Гқ Xk2, where Xk2 tests independence between X and Y at level k of Z.
8.33 Verify the df values shown in Table 8.14 for models ЕҪ XY, Z., ЕҪ XY, YZ., and ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ..
8.34 Verify that loglinear model ЕҪGLS, GI, LI, IS. implies logit model ЕҪ8.16.. Show that the conditional log odds ratio for the effect of S on I equals вҗӨ S1 y вҗӨ S2 in the logit model and вҗӯ11IS q вҗӯ22IS y вҗӯ12IS yвҗӯ21IS in the loglinear model.
8.35 Table 8.22 shows fitted values for models for four-way tables that have direct estimates. a. Use BirchвҖҷs results to verify that the entry is correct for ЕҪW, X, Y, Z.. Verify its residual df. b. Motivate the estimate and df formulas for ЕҪWX, YZ., ЕҪWXY, Z., ЕҪWXY, WZ., and ЕҪWXY, WXZ. using composite variables and the corresponding results for two-way tables we.g., for ЕҪWXY, WZ., given W, Z is independent of the composite XY variablex.

TABLE 8.22 Data for Problem 8.35 a

Model

Expected Frequency Estimate

Residual DF

ЕҪW, X, Y, Z. ЕҪWX, Y, Z. ЕҪWX, WY, Z. ЕҪWX, YZ. ЕҪWX, WY, XZ. ЕҪWX, WY, WZ. ЕҪWXY, Z. ЕҪWXY, WZ. ЕҪWXY, WXZ.

nhqqqnqiqqnqqjq nqqqk rn3 nhiqqnqqjq nqqqk rn2 nhiqqnhqjq nqqqkrnhqqqn nhiqqnqqj krn nhiqqnhqjq nqiqk rnhqqqnqiqq nhiqqnhqjq nhqqkrЕҪ nhqqq.2 nhi jqnqqqkrn nhi jqnhqqk rnhqqq nhi jqnhiqk rnhiqq

HIJK y H y I y J y K q 3 HIJK y HI y J y K q 2 HIJK y HI y HJ y K q H q 1 ЕҪ HI y 1.ЕҪ JK y 1. HIJK y HI y HJ y IK q H q I HIJK y HI y HJ y HK q 2 H ЕҪ HIJ y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. HЕҪ IJ y 1.ЕҪ K y 1. HIЕҪ J y 1.ЕҪ K y 1.

aNumber of levels of W, X, Y, Z, denoted by H, I, J, K. Estimates for other models of each type are obtained by symmetry.

356

LOGLINEAR MODELS FOR CONTINGENCY TABLES

8.36 A T-dimensional table Г„ nab . . . t4 has Ii categories in dimension i. a. Find minimal sufficient statistics, ML estimates of cell probabilities, and residual df for the mutual independence model.
b. Find the minimal sufficient statistics and residual df for the hierarchical model having all two-factor associations but no three-factor interactions.

8.37 Consider loglinear model ЕҪ X, Y, Z. for a 2 = 2 = 2 table. a. Express the model in the form log вҗ® s XвҗӨ.
b. Show that the likelihood equations XX n s XXвҗ®ЛҶ equate Г„ni jk4 and Г„ вҗ®ЛҶi jk4 in the one-dimensional margins.
8.38 Apply IPF to model ЕҪa. ЕҪ X, YZ., and ЕҪb. ЕҪ XZ, YZ.. Show that the ML estimates result within one cycle.

8.39 Given target row totals Г„ri ) 04 and column totals Г„cj ) 04: a. Explain how to use IPF to adjust sample proportions Г„ pi j4 to have these totals but maintain the sample odds ratios.
b. Show how to find cell proportions that have these totals and for which all local odds ratios equal вҗӘ ) 0. ЕҪ Hint: Take initial values of 1.0 in all cells in the first row and in the first column. This determines all other initial cell entries such that all local odds ratios equal вҗӘ..
c. Explain how cell proportions are determined by the marginal proportions and the local odds ratios.

8.40 Refer to BirchвҖҷs results in Section 8.6.3. Show that L has individual terms converging to yПұ as log вҗ®i в„ў "Пұ. Explain why positive definiteness of the information matrix implies that the solution of the
likelihood equations is unique, with likelihood maximized at that point.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 9
Building and Extending LoglinearrLogit Models
In Chapters 5 through 7 we presented logistic regression models, which use the logit link for binomial or multinomial responses. In Chapter 8 we presented loglinear models for contingency tables, which use the log link for Poisson cell counts. Equivalences between them were discussed in Section 8.5.3. In this chapter we discuss building and extending these models with contingency tables.
In Section 9.1 we present graphs that show a modelвҖҷs association and conditional independence patterns. In Section 9.2 we discuss selection and comparison of loglinear models. Diagnostics for checking models, such as residuals, are presented in Section 9.3.
The loglinear models of Chapter 8 treat all variables as nominal. In Section 9.4 we present loglinear models of association between ordinal variables. In Sections 9.5 and 9.6 we present generalizations that replace fixed scores by parameters. In the final section we discuss complications that occur with sparse contingency tables.
9.1 ASSOCIATION GRAPHS AND COLLAPSIBILITY
A graphical representation for associations in loglinear models indicates the pairs of conditionally independent variables. This representation helps reveal implications of models. Our presentation derives partly from Darroch et al. ЕҪ1980., who used mathematical graph theory to represent certain loglinear models ЕҪcalled graphical models. having a conditional independence structure.
9.1.1 Association Graphs An association graph has a set of vertices, each vertex representing a variable. An edge connecting two variables represents a conditional association be-
357

358

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

FIGURE 9.1 Association graph for model ЕҪWX, WY, WZ, YZ..

tween them. For instance, loglinear model ЕҪWX, WY, WZ, YZ. lacks XY and XZ terms. It assumes independence between X and Y and between X and Z, conditional on the remaining two variables. Figure 9.1 portrays this modelвҖҷs association graph. The four variables form the vertices. The four edges represent pairwise conditional associations. Edges do not connect X and Y or X and Z, the conditionally independent pairs.
Two loglinear models with the same pairwise associations have the same association graph. For instance, this association graph is also the one for model ЕҪWX, WYZ., which adds a three-factor WYZ interaction.
A path in an association graph is a sequence of edges leading from one variable to another. Two variables X and Y are said to be separated by a subset of variables if all paths connecting X and Y intersect that subset. For instance, in Figure 9.1, W separates X and Y, since any path connecting X and Y goes through W. The subset Г„W, Z4 also separates X and Y. A fundamental result states that two variables are conditionally independent given any subset of variables that separates them ЕҪKreiner 1987; Whittaker 1990, p. 67.. Thus, not only are X and Y conditionally independent given W and Z, but also given W alone. Similarly, X and Z are conditionally independent given W alone.

9.1.2 Collapsibility in Three-Way Contingency Tables
In Section 2.3.3 we showed that conditional associations in partial tables usually differ from marginal associations. Under certain collapsibility conditions, however, they are the same.

For three-way tables, XY marginal and conditional odds ratios are identical if either Z and X are conditionally independent or if Z and Y are conditionally independent.
The conditions state that the variable treated as the control ЕҪ Z. is conditionally independent of X or Y, or both. These conditions occur for loglinear models ЕҪ XY, YZ. and ЕҪ XY, XZ.. Thus, the fitted XY odds ratio is identical in the partial tables and the marginal table for models with association graphs

X

Y

Z and Y

X

Z

ASSOCIATION GRAPHS AND COLLAPSIBILITY

359

or even simpler models, but not for the model with graph

X

Z

Y

in which an edge connects Z to both X and Y. The proof follows directly from the formulas for models ЕҪ XY, YZ. and ЕҪ XY, XZ. ЕҪProblem 9.26..
We illustrate for the student survey ЕҪTable 8.3. from Section 8.2.4, with A s alcohol use, C s cigarette use, and M s marijuana use. Model ЕҪ AM, CM . specifies AC conditional independence, given M. It has association graph

A

M

C.

Consider the AM association. Since C is conditionally independent of A, the AM fitted conditional odds ratios are the same as the AM fitted marginal odds ratio collapsed over C. From Table 8.5, both equal 61.9. Similarly, the CM association is collapsible. The AC association is not, because M is conditionally dependent with both A and C in model ЕҪ AM, CM .. Thus, A and C may be marginally dependent, even though they are conditionally independent. In fact, from Table 8.5, the fitted AC marginal odds ratio for this model is 2.7.
For model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM ., no pair is conditionally independent. No collapsibility conditions are fulfilled. Table 8.5 showed that each pair has quite different fitted marginal and conditional associations for this model. When a model contains all two-factor effects, effects may change after collapsing over any variable.

9.1.3 Collapsibility and Logit Models
The collapsibility conditions apply also to logit models. For instance, suppose that a clinical trial studies the association between a binary treatment variable X ЕҪ x1 s 1, x2 s 0. and a binary response Y, using data from K centers ЕҪ Z.. The logit model
logit P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi q вҗӨkZ
has the same treatment effect вҗӨ for each center. Since this model corresponds to loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., this effect may differ after collapsing the 2 = 2 = K table over centers. The estimated XY conditional odds
ratio, expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ., typically differs from the sample odds ratio in the marginal
2 = 2 table. Next, consider the simpler model that lacks center effects,
logit P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s i , Z s k . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .
For a given treatment, the success probability is identical for each center. The model satisfies a collapsibility condition, because it states that Z is

360

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

conditionally independent of Y, given X. This logit model is equivalent to loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ., for which the XY association is collapsible. So, when center effects are negligible and the simpler model fits nearly as well, the estimated treatment effect is approximately the marginal XY odds ratio.

9.1.4 Collapsibility and Association Graphs for Multiway Tables
Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, p. 47. provided a parametric collapsibility condition with multiway tables:
Suppose that a model for a multiway table partitions variables into three mutually exclusive subsets, A, B, C, such that B separates A and C. After collapsing the table over the variables in C, parameters relating variables in A and parameters relating variables in A to variables in B are unchanged.
We illustrate using model ЕҪWX, WY, WZ, YZ. ЕҪFigure 9.1.. Let A s Г„ X 4, B s Г„W 4, and C s Г„Y, Z4. Since the XY and XZ terms do not appear, all parameters linking set A with set C equal zero, and B separates A and C. If we collapse over Y and Z, the WX association is unchanged. Next, identify A s Г„Y, Z4, B s Г„W 4, C s Г„ X 4. Then, conditional associations among W, Y, and Z remain the same after collapsing over X.
This result also implies that when any variable is independent of all other variables, collapsing over it does not affect any other model terms. For instance, associations among W, X, and Y in model ЕҪWX, WY, XY, Z. are the same as in ЕҪWX, WY, XY ..
When set B contains more than one variable, although parameter values are unchanged in collapsing over set C, the ML estimates of those parameters may differ slightly. A stronger collapsibility definition also requires that the estimates be identical. This condition of commutativity of fitting and collapsing holds if the model contains the highest-order term relating variables in B to each other. Asmussen and Edwards ЕҪ1983. discussed this property, which relates to decomposability of tables ЕҪNote 8.2..

9.2 MODEL SELECTION AND COMPARISON
Strategies for selecting and comparing loglinear models are similar to those for logistic regression discussed in Section 6.1. A model should be complex enough to fit well but also relatively simple to interpret, smoothing rather than overfitting the data.
9.2.1 Considerations in Model Selection
The potentially useful models are usually a small subset of the possible models. A study designed to answer certain questions through confirmatory analyses may plan to compare models that differ only by the inclusion of certain terms. Also, models should recognize distinctions between response

MODEL SELECTION AND COMPARISON

361

and explanatory variables. The modeling process should concentrate on terms linking responses and terms linking explanatory variables to responses. The model should contain the most general interaction term relating the explanatory variables. From the likelihood equations, this has the effect of equating the fitted totals to the sample totals at combinations of their levels. This is natural, since one normally treats such totals as fixed. Related to this, certain marginal totals are often fixed by the sampling design. Any potential model should include those totals as sufficient statistics, so likelihood equations equate them to the fitted totals.
Consider Table 8.8 with I s automobile injury and S s seat-belt use as responses and G s gender and L s location as explanatory variables. Then we treat Г„ngqlq4 as fixed at each combination for G and L. For example, 20,629 women had accidents in urban locations, so the fitted counts should have 20,629 women in urban locations. To ensure this, a loglinear model should contain the GL term, which implies from its likelihood equations that
Г„ вҗ®ЛҶ gqlqs ngqlq4. Thus, the model should be at least as complex as ЕҪGL, S, I .
and focus on the effects of G and L on S and I as well as the SI association. If S is also explanatory and only I is a response, Г„ngql s4 should be fixed.
With a single categorical response, relevant loglinear models correspond to logit models for that response. One should then use logit rather than loglinear models, when the main focus is describing effects on that response.
For exploratory studies, a search among potential models may provide clues about associations and interactions. One approach first fits the model having single-factor terms, then the model having two-factor and single-factor terms, then the model having three-factor and lower terms, and so on. Fitting such models often reveals a restricted range of good-fitting models. In Section 8.4.2 we used this strategy with the automobile injury data set. Automatic search mechanisms among possible models, such as backward elimination, may also be useful but should be used with care and skepticism. Such a strategy need not yield a meaningful model.

9.2.2 Model Building for the Dayton Student Survey
In Sections 8.2.4 and 8.3.2 we analyzed the use of alcohol ЕҪ A., cigarettes ЕҪC., and marijuana ЕҪ M . by a sample of high school seniors. The study also classified students by gender ЕҪG. and race ЕҪ R.. Table 9.1 shows the five-dimensional contingency table. In selecting a model, we treat A, C, and M as responses and G and R as explanatory. Thus, a model should contain the GR term, which forces the GR fitted marginal totals to equal the sample marginal totals
Table 9.2 displays goodness-of-fit tests for several models. Because many cell counts are small, the chi-squared approximation for G2 may be poor, but this index is useful for comparing models. The first model listed contains only the GR association and assumes conditional independence for the other nine pairs of associations. It fits horribly, which is no surprise. Model 2, with all two-factor terms, on the other hand, seems to fit well. Model 3, containing all

362

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.1 Alcohol, Cigarette, and Marijuana Use for High School Seniors

Marijuana Use

Race s White

Race s Other

Alcohol Cigarette

Use

Use

Female Yes No

Male Yes No

Female Yes No

Male Yes No

Yes

Yes

405 268 453 228

23 23

30 19

No

13 218

28 201

2 19

1 18

No

Yes

No

1 17 1 117

1 17 1 133

0

1

0 12

1

8

0 17

Source: Harry Khamis, Wright State University.

TABLE 9.2 Goodness-of-Fit Tests for Loglinear Models for Table 9.1

Model a

G2

df

1. Mutual independence q GR

1325.1

25

2. Homogeneous association

15.3

16

3. All three-factor terms

5.3

6

4a. ЕҪ2.бҺҗAC 4b. ЕҪ2.бҺҗAM 4c. ЕҪ2.бҺҗCM 4d. ЕҪ2.бҺҗAG 4e. ЕҪ2.бҺҗAR 4f. ЕҪ2.бҺҗCG 4g. ЕҪ2.бҺҗCR 4h. ЕҪ2.бҺҗGM 4i. ЕҪ2.бҺҗMR

201.2

17

107.0

17

513.5

17

18.7

17

20.3

17

16.3

17

15.8

17

25.2

17

18.9

17

5. ЕҪ AC, AM, CM, AG, AR, GM, GR, MR.

16.7

18

6. ЕҪ AC, AM, CM, AG, AR, GM, GR.

19.9

19

7. ЕҪ AC, AM, CM, AG, AR, GR.

28.8

20

aG, gender; R, race; A, alcohol use; C, cigarette use; M, marijuana use.

the three-factor interaction terms, also fits well, but the improvement in fit is not great ЕҪdifference in G2 of 15.3 y 5.3 s 10.0 based on df s 16 y 6 s 10.. Thus, we consider models without three-factor terms. Beginning with model 2, we eliminate two-factor terms. We use backward elimination, sequentially taking out terms for which the resulting increase in G2 is smallest, when refitting the model.
Table 9.2 shows the start of this process. Nine pairwise associations are candidates for removal from model 2 ЕҪall except GR., shown in models 4a through 4i. The smallest increase in G2, compared to model 2, occurs in removing the CR term ЕҪi.e., model 4g.. The increase is 15.8 y 15.3 s 0.5, with df s 17 y 16 s 1, so this elimination seems sensible. After removing it,

MODEL SELECTION AND COMPARISON

363

the smallest additional increase results from removing the CG term ЕҪmodel 5., resulting in G2 s 16.7 with df s 18, and a change in G2 of 0.9 based on df s 1. Removing next the MR term ЕҪmodel 6. yields G2 s 19.9 with df s 19, a change in G2 of 3.2 based on df s 1.
Further removals have a more severe effect. For instance, removing the AG term increases G2 by 5.3, with df s 1, for a P-value of 0.02. One cannot
take such P-values literally, since the data suggested these tests, but it seems safest not to drop additional terms. wSee Westfall and Wolfinger ЕҪ1997. and Westfall and Young ЕҪ1993. for methods of adjusting P-values to account for multiple testsx. Model 6, denoted by ЕҪ AC, AM, CM, AG, AR, GM, GR., has
association graph

M

G

C

A

R

Every path between C and Г„G, R4 involves a variable in Г„ A, M4. Given the outcome on alcohol use and marijuana use, the model states that cigarette use is independent of both gender and race. Collapsing over the explanatory variables race and gender, the conditional associations between C and A and between C and M are the same as with the model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . fitted in Section 8.2.4.
Removing the GM term from this model yields model 7 in Table 9.2. Its association graph reveals that A separates Г„G, R4 from Г„C, M4. Thus, all pairwise conditional associations among A, C, and M in model 7 are identical to those in model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM ., collapsing over G and R. In fact, model 7 does not fit poorly ЕҪG2 s 28.8 with df s 20. considering the large
sample size. ЕҪIts sample dissimilarity index is вҢ¬ЛҶ s 0.036.. Hence, one might
collapse over gender and race in studying associations among the primary variables. An advantage of the full five-variable model is that it estimates effects of gender and race on these responses, in particular the effects of race and gender on alcohol use and the effect of gender on marijuana use.

9.2.3 Loglinear Model Comparison Statistics

Consider two loglinear models, M1 and M0, with M0 a special case of M1. By Sections 4.5.4 and 5.4.3, the likelihood-ratio statistic for testing M0 against M1 is G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. s G2ЕҪ M0 . y G2ЕҪ M1.. We used this statistic above in comparing pairs of models.
Let n denote a column vector of the observed cell counts Г„ni4. Let вҗ®ЛҶ 0 and вҗ®ЛҶ 1 denote vectors of the fitted values Г„ вҗ®ЛҶ0i4 and Г„ вҗ®ЛҶ1i4 for M0 and M1. The
deviance G2ЕҪ M0. for the simpler model partitions into

G2 ЕҪ M0 . s G2 ЕҪ M1 . q G2 ЕҪ M0 < M1 . .

ЕҪ 9 .1.

Just as G2ЕҪ M . measures the distance of fitted values for M from n,
G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. measures the distance of fit вҗ®ЛҶ 0 from fit вҗ®ЛҶ 1. In this sense,

364

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

decomposition ЕҪ9.1. expresses a certain orthogonality: The distance of n from
вҗ®ЛҶ 0 equals the distance of n from вҗ®ЛҶ 1 plus the distance of вҗ®ЛҶ 1 from вҗ®ЛҶ 0.
The model comparison statistic equals

G2 ЕҪ M0 < M1 . s 2 Гқ ni logЕҪ nirвҗ®ЛҶ0i . y 2 Гқ ni logЕҪ nirвҗ®ЛҶ1i .

i

i

s 2 Гқ ni logЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ1irвҗ®ЛҶ0i . .
i

ЕҪ 9 .2.

The two loglinear models have the matrix form ЕҪ8.17., or

log вҗ®0 s X 0вҗӨ0 and log вҗ®1 s X1вҗӨ1 .

Since

M0

is

simpler

than

M1,

one

can

express

U
log вҗ®0 s X 0вҗӨ0 s X1вҗӨ1 ,

where

U
вҗӨ1

equals

вҗӨ0

with

0

elements

appended

corresponding

to

the

extra

parame-

ters in вҗӨ1 but not in вҗӨ0. Then, from ЕҪ9.2.,

G2

ЕҪ

M0

<

M1

.

s

X
2n

ЕҪlog

вҗ®ЛҶ 1

y

log

вҗ®ЛҶ 0

.

s

X
2n

X1вҗӨЛҶ 1 y X1вҗӨЛҶU1

s 2вҗ®ЛҶ 1X X1вҗӨЛҶ 1 y X1вҗӨЛҶU1 s 2вҗ®ЛҶ 1X ЕҪlog вҗ®ЛҶ 1 y log вҗ®ЛҶ 0 .

s 2 Гқ вҗ®ЛҶ1i logЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ1irвҗ®ЛҶ0i . ,

ЕҪ 9 .3.

where the replacement of n by вҗ®ЛҶ 1 follows from the likelihood equations

X

X

n X1 s вҗ®ЛҶ 1X1

for

M1

wRecall

ЕҪ8.22.x.

Statistic

ЕҪ9.3.

has

the

same

form

as

G2ЕҪ M0., but with Г„вҗ®ЛҶ1i4 playing the role of the observed data. Note that

G2ЕҪ M0. is the special case of G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. with M1 saturated.

The Pearson difference X 2ЕҪ M0. y X 2ЕҪ M1. does not have Pearson form.

It is not even necessarily nonnegative. A more appropriate Pearson statistic

for comparing models is

X 2 ЕҪ M0 < M1 . s Гқ ЕҪ вҗ®ЛҶ1i y вҗ®ЛҶ0i .2rвҗ®ЛҶ0i .

ЕҪ 9 .4.

This has the usual form with Г„вҗ®ЛҶ1i4 in place of Г„ni4. Statistics ЕҪ9.3. and ЕҪ9.4.
depend on the data only through the fitted values and thus only through
sufficient statistics for M1. When M0 holds, G2ЕҪ M0. and G2ЕҪ M1. have asymptotic chi-squared distri-
butions, and G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. is asymptotically chi-squared with df equal to the difference between df for M0 and M1. Haberman ЕҪ1977a. showed that G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. and X 2ЕҪ M0 < M1. have the same null large-sample behavior, even for fairly sparse tables. ЕҪUnder certain conditions, their difference converges in probability to 0 as n increases.. When M1 holds but M0 does not, G2ЕҪ M1. still has its asymptotic chi-squared distribution, but the other two statistics
tend to grow unboundedly as n increases.

MODEL SELECTION AND COMPARISON

365

9.2.4 Partitioning Chi-Squared with Model Comparisons
Equation ЕҪ9.1. utilizes the property by which a chi-squared statistic with df ) 1 partitions into components. We used such partitionings in tests for trend with ordinal predictors in linear logit or linear probability models ЕҪSection 5.3.5. and with ordinal responses in cumulative logit models ЕҪSection 7.2.. More generally, this property applies with a set of nested models to test a sequence of hypotheses. The separate tests for comparing pairs of models are asymptotically independent.
For example, a chi-squared decomposition with J y 1 models justifies the partitioning of G2 stated in Section 3.3.3 for 2 = J tables. For j s 2, . . . , J, let Mj denote the model that satisfies
вҗӘi s ЕҪ вҗ®1i вҗ®2, iq1 . rЕҪ вҗ®1, iq1 вҗ®2 i . s 1, i s 1, . . . , j y 1.
For Mj, the 2 = j table consisting of columns 1 through j satisfies independence. Model MJ is independence in the complete 2 = J table. Model Mh is a special case of Mj whenever h ) j. By ЕҪ9.2.,
G2 ЕҪ MJ . s G2 ЕҪ MJ < MJy1 . q G2 ЕҪ MJy1 . s G2 ЕҪ MJ < MJy1 . q G2 ЕҪ MJy1 < MJy2 . q G2 ЕҪ MJy2 . s РёРёРё s G2 ЕҪ MJ < MJy1 . q РёРёРё qG2 ЕҪ M3 < M2 . q G2 ЕҪ M2 . .
From ЕҪ9.3., G2ЕҪ Mj < Mjy1 . has the G2 form with the fitted values for model Mjy1 playing the role of the observed data. Substitution of fitted values for the two models into ЕҪ9.3. shows that G2ЕҪ Mj < Mjy1 . is identical to G2 for testing independence in a 2 = 2 table; the first column combines column 1 through j y 1 of the original table, and the second column is column j of the original table.
With several preplanned comparisons, simultaneous test procedures lessen the probability of attributing importance to sample effects that simply reflect chance variation. These procedures use adjusted significance levels. For a set of s tests for nested models, when each test has level 1 y ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ .1r s, the overall asymptotic PЕҪtype I error. F вҗЈ ЕҪGoodman 1969a.. For instance, suppose that we test the fit of ЕҪWXZ, WY, XY, ZY ., compare that model to ЕҪWX, WZ, XZ, WY, XY, ZY ., and compare that model to ЕҪWX, WZ, XZ, WY, ZY .. To ensure overall вҗЈ s 0.05 for the s s 3 tests, use level 1 y ЕҪ0.95.1r3 s 0.017 for each.

9.2.5 Identical Marginal and Conditional Tests of Independence
A test using G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. simplifies dramatically when both models have direct estimates. In that case, the models have independence linkages neces-

366

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

sary to ensure collapsibility. A test of conditional independence has the same result as the test of independence applied to the marginal table. Sundberg ЕҪ1975. proved the following: When two direct models M0 and M1 are identical except for a pairwise association term, G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. is identical to G2 for testing independence in the marginal table for that pair of variables. Bishop ЕҪ1971. and Goodman ЕҪ1970, 1971b. have related discussion.
For instance, G2wЕҪ X, Y, Z. < ЕҪ XY, Z.x tests вҗӯX Y s 0 in model ЕҪ XY, Z.. Thus, it tests XY conditional independence under the assumption that X and Y are jointly independent of Z. Using the two sets of fitted values, from ЕҪ9.3., it equals

2 Гқ Гқ Гқ ni jqnqqk log

ni jqnqqkrn
2

i jk

n

niqqnqjq nqqkrn

s 2 Гқ Гқ ni jqlog ni jq ,

ij

n iqq nqjqrn

which equals G2wЕҪ X, Y .x for testing independence in the marginal XY table. This is not surprising. The collapsibility conditions imply that for model ЕҪ XY, Z., the marginal XY association is the same as the conditional XY association.

9.3 DIAGNOSTICS FOR CHECKING MODELS
The model comparison test using G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. is useful for detecting whether an extra term improves a model fit. Cell residuals provide a cell-specific indication of model lack of fit.

9.3.1 Residuals for Loglinear Models
In Section 4.5.5 we noted that residuals for the independence model ЕҪSection 3.3.1. extend to any Poisson GLM. For cell i in a contingency table with
observed count ni and fitted value вҗ®ЛҶi, the Pearson residual is

ni y вҗ®ЛҶi
ei s 'вҗ®ЛҶi .

ЕҪ 9 .5.

These relate to the Pearson statistic by Гқei2 s X 2. Like the Pearson residual ЕҪ6.1. for binomial models, the asymptotic
variances of Г„ei4 are less than 1.0. They average ЕҪresidual df.rЕҪnumber of

MODELING ORDINAL ASSOCIATIONS

367

cells.. Haberman ЕҪ1973a. defined the standardized Pearson residual,
ri s eir'1 y ЛҶhi ,
where the leverage ЛҶhi is a diagonal element of the estimated hat matrix
ЕҪSection 4.5.5.. This has an asymptotic standard normal distribution and is preferable to the Pearson residual. A closed-form expression applies for loglinear models having direct estimates ЕҪHaberman 1978, p. 275.. Alternative residuals use components of the deviance ЕҪSection 4.5.5..

9.3.2 Student Survey Example Revisited
For Table 9.1 cross-classifying alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana use by gender and race, we suggested in Section 9.2.2 that the model with all two-factor associations is plausible. For it, the only large standardized Pearson residual equals 3.2, resulting from a fitted value of 3.1 in the cell having a count of 8. Further comparisons suggested that the simpler model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM, AG, AR, GM, GR. is adequate. Its only large standardized residual equals 3.3, referring to a fitted value of 2.9 in that cell. The number of nonwhite males who did not use alcohol or marijuana but who smoked cigarettes is somewhat greater than either model predicts. The standardized Pearson residuals do not suggest problems with either model, considering the large sample size and many cells studied.

9.3.3 Correspondence between Loglinear and Logit Residuals

In Section 8.5 we showed that logit models in contingency tables are equivalent to certain loglinear models. However, a Pearson residual for a logit model differs from a Pearson residual for a loglinear model. The numerators comparing the ith observed and fitted binomial or Poisson count are the same, since the model fitted values are the same. However, the logit model uses a fitted binomial standard deviation in the denominator wsee ЕҪ6.1.x, whereas the loglinear model uses a fitted Poisson standard deviation wsee ЕҪ9.5.x. Thus, the logit Pearson residual exceeds the loglinear Pearson residual ЕҪ9.5..
Once standardized by dividing by estimated standard errors, the standardized Pearson residuals are identical for the two models. This is another reason for preferring standardized residuals over ordinary Pearson residuals.

9.4 MODELING ORDINAL ASSOCIATIONS
The loglinear models presented so far have a serious limitationбҺҸthey treat all classifications as nominal. If the order of a variableвҖҷs categories changes in

368

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.3 Opinions about Premarital Sex and Availability of Teenage Birth Control

Teenage Birth Controla

Premarital Sex

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Always wrong

81 ЕҪ42.4.1
7.6 2 ЕҪ80.9.3

68 ЕҪ51.2.
3.1 ЕҪ67.6.

60 ЕҪ86.4. y4.1 ЕҪ69.4.

38 ЕҪ67.0. y4.8 ЕҪ29.1.

Almost always wrong

24 ЕҪ16.0.
2.3 ЕҪ20.8.

26 ЕҪ19.3.
1.8 ЕҪ23.1.

29 ЕҪ32.5. y0.8 ЕҪ31.5.

14 ЕҪ25.2. y2.8 ЕҪ17.6.

Wrong only sometimes

18 ЕҪ30.1. y2.7 ЕҪ24.4.

41 ЕҪ36.3.
1.0 ЕҪ36.1.

74 ЕҪ61.2.
2.2 ЕҪ65.7.

42 ЕҪ47.4. y1.0 ЕҪ48.8.

Not wrong at all

36 ЕҪ70.6. y6.1 ЕҪ33.0.

57 ЕҪ85.2. y4.6 ЕҪ65.1.

161 ЕҪ143.8.
2.4 ЕҪ157.4.

157 ЕҪ111.4.
6.8 ЕҪ155.5.

a1 Independence model fit; 2 standardized Pearson residuals for the independence model fit; 3linear-by-linear association model fit.

Source: 1991 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

any way, the fit is the same. For ordinal classifications, these models ignore important information.
Refer to Table 9.3. Subjects were asked their opinion about a man and woman having sexual relations before marriage ЕҪalways wrong, almost always wrong, wrong only sometimes, not wrong at all.. They were also asked whether methods of birth control should be available to teenagers between the ages of 14 and 16 ЕҪstrongly disagree, disagree, agree, strongly agree.. For the loglinear model of independence, denoted by I, G2ЕҪ I . s 127.6 with df s 9. The model fits poorly. Yet, adding the ordinary association term makes it saturated and unhelpful.
Table 9.3 also contains fitted values and standardized residuals for independence. The residuals in the corners stand out. Sample counts are much larger than independence predicts where both responses are the most negative possible or the most positive possible. By contrast, the counts are much smaller than fitted values where one response is the most positive and the other is the most negative. Cross-classifications of ordinal variables often exhibit their greatest deviations from independence in the corner cells. This pattern for Table 9.3 indicates lack of fit in the form of a positive trend.

MODELING ORDINAL ASSOCIATIONS

369

Subjects who are more willing to make birth control available to teenagers also tend to feel more tolerant about premarital sex.
Models for ordinal variables use association terms that permit trends. The models are more complex than the independence model, yet unsaturated. Models with association and interaction terms exist in situations in which nominal models are saturated. Tests with ordinal models have improved power for detecting trends.

9.4.1 Linear-by-Linear Association in Two-Way Tables

For two-way tables, a simple model for two ordinal variables assigns ordered
row scores u1 F u2 F РёРёРё F uI and column scores В®1 F В®2 F РёРёРё F В®J . The model is

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӨ uiВ®j ,

ЕҪ 9 .6.

with constraints such as вҗӯIX s вҗӯJY s 0. This is the special case of the saturated model ЕҪ8.2. in which вҗӯi jX Y s вҗӨ uiВ®j. It requires only one parameter to describe association, whereas the saturated model requires ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1..
Independence occurs when вҗӨ s 0. The term вҗӨ uiВ®j represents the deviation of log вҗ®i j from independence. The deviation is linear in the Y scores at a fixed level of X and linear in the X scores at a fixed level of Y. In column j, for instance, the deviation is a linear function of X, having form ЕҪslope. = ЕҪscore for X ., with slope вҗӨ В®j. Because of this property, ЕҪ9.6. is called the linear-by-linear association model ЕҪabbreviated, L = L.. The model has its
greatest departures from independence in the corners of the table. Birch ЕҪ1965., Goodman ЕҪ1979a., and Haberman ЕҪ1974b. introduced special cases.
The direction and strength of the association depend on вҗӨ. When вҗӨ ) 0,
Y tends to increase as X increases. Expected frequencies are larger than expected ЕҪunder independence. in cells where X and Y are both high or both low. When вҗӨ - 0, Y tends to decrease as X increases. When the data display a positive or negative trend, the L = L model usually fits much better than
the independence model. For the 2 = 2 table using the cells intersecting rows a and c with columns
b and d, direct substitution shows that the model has

log s вҗ®ab вҗ®cd вҗӨ ЕҪ uc y ua. ЕҪ В®d y В®b . .
вҗ®ad вҗ®cb

ЕҪ 9 .7.

This log odds ratio is stronger as <вҗӨ< increases and for pairs of categories that are farther apart. Simple interpretations result when u2 y u1 s РёРёРё s uI y uIy1 and В®2 y В®1 s РёРёРё s В®J y В®Jy1 . When Г„ui s i4 and Г„ В®j s j4, for instance, the local odds ratios ЕҪ2.10. for adjacent rows and adjacent columns have common value e вҗӨ. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. called this case uniform association. Figure 9.2 portrays local odds ratios having uniform value.

370

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

FIGURE 9.2 Constant odds ratio implied by uniform association model. ЕҪ Note: вҗӨ s the constant log odds ratio for adjacent rows and adjacent columns..

The choice of scores affects the interpretation of вҗӨ. Often, the response

scale discretizes an inherently continuous scale. It is sensible to choose scores

that approximate distances between midpoints of categories for the underly-

ing scale, such as we did in measuring alcohol consumption for a linear logit

model in Section 3.4.5. It is sometimes useful to standardize the scores,

subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation, so

Гқ uiвҗІ iqs Гқ В®jвҗІqj s 0

Гқ

u2iвҗІ iqs

Гқ

2
В®j вҗІqj

s

1.

Then, вҗӨ represents the log odds ratios for standard deviation distances in the X and Y directions. The L = L model tends to fit well when an underlying continuous distribution is approximately bivariate normal. For standardized scores, вҗӨ is then comparable to вҗіrЕҪ1 y вҗі 2 ., where вҗі is the underlying correlation. For weak associations, вҗӨ f вҗі ЕҪsee Becker 1989b; Goodman 1981a, b, 1985..

9.4.2 Corresponding Logit Model for Adjacent Responses

A logit formulation of the L = L model treats Y as a response and X as explanatory. Let вҗІj < i s PЕҪY s j < X s i.. Using logits for adjacent response categories ЕҪSection 7.4.1.,

log s вҗІ jq1 <i log s вҗ®i, jq1 ЕҪ вҗӯjq1 Y y вҗӯjY . q вҗӨ ЕҪ В®jq1 y В®j . ui .

вҗІj<i

вҗ®i j

For unit-spaced Г„В®j4, this simplifies to log s вҗІ jq1 < i вҗЈ j q вҗӨ ui вҗІj<i

MODELING ORDINAL ASSOCIATIONS

371

where вҗЈj s вҗӯjq1 Y y вҗӯYj . The same linear logit effect вҗӨ applies simultaneously for all ЕҪ J y 1. pairs of adjacent response categories: The odds Y s j q 1 instead of Y s j multiply by e вҗӨ for each unit change in X. In using
equal-interval response scores, we implicitly assume that the effect of X is
the same on each of the J y 1 adjacent-categories logits for Y.

9.4.3 Likelihood Equations and Model Fitting The Poisson log-likelihood LЕҪвҗ®. s ГқiГқj ni j log вҗ®i j y ГқiГқj вҗ®i j simplifies for the L = L model ЕҪ9.6. to

LЕҪ вҗ®. s nвҗӯ q Гқ niqвҗӯiX q Гқ nqj вҗӯjY q вҗӨ Гқ Гқ uiВ®j ni j

i

j

ij

y Гқ Гқ expЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӨ uiВ®j . .
ij

Differentiating LЕҪвҗ®. with respect to ЕҪ вҗӯiX, вҗӯYj , вҗӨ . and setting the three partial derivatives equal to zero yields likelihood equations

вҗ®ЛҶiqs niq, i s 1, . . . , I, вҗ®ЛҶqj s nqj , j s 1, . . . , J ,

Гқ Гқ uiВ®j вҗ®ЛҶi j s Гқ Гқ uiВ®j ni j .

ij

ij

Iterative methods such as NewtonбҺҗRaphson yield the ML fit.
Let pi j s ni jrn and вҗІЛҶi j s вҗ®ЛҶi jrn. The third likelihood equation
that

Гқ Гқ uiВ®jвҗІЛҶi j s Гқ Гқ uiВ®j pi j .

ij

ij

implies

Since marginal distributions and hence marginal means and variances are identical for fitted and observed distributions, the third equation implies the correlation between the scores for X and Y is the same for both distributions. The fitted counts display the same positive or negative trend as the data.
Since Г„ui4 and Г„В®j4 are fixed, the L = L model ЕҪ9.6. has only one more parameter ЕҪвҗӨ. than the independence model. Its residual
df s IJ y 1 q ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1. q 1 s IJ y I y J ,

unsaturated for all but 2 = 2 tables.

9.4.4 Sex Opinions Example Table 9.3 also reports fitted values for the linear-by-linear association model applied to Table 9.3, using scores Г„1, 2, 3, 44 for rows and columns. Table 9.4

372

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.4 Output for Fitting Linear-by-Linear Association Model to Table 9.3

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

8

11.5337

Pearson Chi- Square

8

11.5085

Parameter

Standard Estimate Error

Wald 95% Conf. Limits

ChiSquare Pr ) ChiSq

Intercept

premar

1

0.4735 1.7537

0.4339 0.2343

y0.3769 1.3239 1.2944 2.2129

1.19 56.01

0.2751 -.0001

premar

2 0.1077 0.1988 y0.2820 0.4974 0.29 0.5880

premar

3 y0.0163 0.1264 y0.2641 0.2314 0.02 0.8972

premar birth birth birth

4 0.0000 0.0000 1 1.8797 0.2491 2 1.4156 0.1996 3 1.1551 0.1291

0.0000 1.3914 1.0243 0.9021

0.0000 2.3679 1.8068 1.4082

. 56.94 50.29 80.07

.
-.0001 -.0001 -.0001

birth linlin

4 0.0000 0.0000 0.2858 0.0282

0.0000 0.0000

.

0.2305 0.3412 102.46

. -.0001

Source linlin

LR Statistics

DF

Chi- Square

1

116.12

Pr ) ChiSq ).0001

shows software output. To get this, we added a variable ЕҪdenoted вҖҳвҖҳlinlinвҖҷвҖҷ. to the independence model having values equal to the product of row and column number. Compared to the independence model, for which G2ЕҪ I . s 127.6 with df s 9, the L = L model fits dramatically better wG2ЕҪ L = L. s 11.5, df s 8x. This is especially noticeable in the corners, where it predicts the greatest departures from independence.
The ML estimate вҗӨЛҶs 0.286 ЕҪSE s 0.028. indicates that subjects having
more favorable attitudes about teen birth control also tend to have more tolerant attitudes about premarital sex. The estimated local odds ratio is
expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ. s expЕҪ0.286. s 1.33. A 95% Wald confidence interval is expЕҪ0.286 "
1.96 = 0.028., or ЕҪ1.26, 1.41.. The strength of association seems weak. From ЕҪ9.7., however, nonlocal odds ratios are stronger. The estimated odds ratio for the four corner cells equals
exp вҗӨЛҶЕҪ u4 y u1 . ЕҪ В®4 y В®1 . s exp 0.286ЕҪ4 y 1. ЕҪ4 y 1. s 13.1.
This also results from the corner fitted values, ЕҪ80.9 = 155.5.rЕҪ29.1 = 33.0. s 13.1.
Two sets of scores having the same spacings yield the same вҗӨЛҶ and the
same fit. Any other sets of equally spaced scores yield the same fit but an
appropriately rescaled вҗӨЛҶ. For instance, using row scores Г„2, 4, 6, 84 with Г„В®j s j4 also yields G2 s 11.5, but вҗӨЛҶs 0.143 with SE s 0.014 ЕҪboth half as

ASSOCIATION MODELS

373

large.. For Table 9.3, one might regard categories 2 and 3 as farther apart than categories 1 and 2, or categories 3 and 4. Scores such as Г„1, 2, 4, 54 for rows and columns recognize this. The L = L model then has G2 s 8.8
ЕҪdf s 8. and вҗӨЛҶs 0.146 ЕҪSE s 0.014..
One need not regard the scores as approximations for distances between
categories or as reasonable scalings of ordinal variables in order for the
models to be valid. They simply imply a certain pattern for the odds ratios. If the L = L model fits well with equally spaced row and column scores, the uniform local odds ratio describes the association regardless of whether the
scores are sensible indexes of true distances between categories. For scores Г„ui s i4 with Table 9.3, the marginal mean and standard
deviation for premarital sex are 2.81 and 1.26. The standardized scores are Г„ЕҪi y 2.81.r1.264, or ЕҪy1.44, y0.65, 0.15, 0.95.. The standardized equal-interval scores for birth control are ЕҪy1.65, y0.69, 0.27, 1.23.. For these scores,
вҗӨЛҶs 0.374. By solving вҗӨЛҶs вҗіЛҶrЕҪ1 y вҗіЛҶ2 . for вҗіЛҶ, вҗіЛҶ s 0.333. If there is an
underlying bivariate normal distribution, we estimate the correlation to be
0.333.

9.4.5 Directed Ordinal Test of Independence
For the linear-by-linear association model, H0: independence is H0: вҗӨ s 0. The likelihood-ratio test statistic equals
G2ЕҪ I < L = L. s G2ЕҪ I . y G2ЕҪ L = L. .
Designed to detect positive or negative trends, it has df s 1. For Table 9.3, G2ЕҪ I < L = L. s 127.6 y 11.5 s 116.1. This has P - 0.0001, extremely strong
evidence of an association. The Wald statistic z 2 s ЕҪвҗӨЛҶrSE.2 s
ЕҪ0.286r0.0282.2 s 102.5 ЕҪdf s 1. also shows strong evidence. The correlation statistic ЕҪ3.15. presented in Section 3.4.1 for testing independence is the score statistic for H0: вҗӨ s 0 in this model. It equals 112.6 ЕҪdf s 1..
When the L = L model holds, the ordinal test using G2ЕҪ I < L = L. is asymptotically more powerful than the test using G2ЕҪ I .. This is true for the same reason given in Section 6.4.2 for the linear logit model. The power of a chi-squared test increases when df decrease, for fixed noncentrality. When the L = L model holds, the noncentrality is the same for G2ЕҪ I < L = L. and G2ЕҪ I .; thus G2ЕҪ I < L = L. is more powerful, since its df s 1 compared to ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. for G2ЕҪ I .. The power advantage increases as I and J increase, since the noncentrality remains focused on df s 1 for G2ЕҪ I < L = L. but df also increases for G2ЕҪ I ..

9.5 ASSOCIATION MODELS*
Generalizations of the linear-by-linear association model apply to multiway tables or treat scores as parameters rather than fixed. The models are called association models, because they focus on the association structure.

374

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

9.5.1 Row and Column Effects Models
We first present a model that treats X as nominal and Y as ordinal. It is appropriate for two-way tables with ordered columns, using scores В®1 F В®2 F РёРёРё F В®J . Since the rows are unordered, they do not have scores. Replacing the ordered values Г„ вҗӨ ui4 in the linear-by-linear term вҗӨ uiВ®j in model ЕҪ9.6. by unordered parameters Г„вҗ®i4 gives

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗ®iВ®j .

ЕҪ 9 .8.

Constraints are needed such as вҗӯIX s вҗӯJY s вҗ®I s 0. The Г„вҗ®i4 are called row effects. The model is called the row effects model.
Model ЕҪ9.8. has I y 1 more parameters ЕҪthe Г„вҗ®i4. than the independence model. Independence is the special case вҗ®1 s РёРёРё s вҗ®I. A corresponding column effects model has association term uiвҗҜj. It treats X as ordinal with scores Г„ui4 and Y as nominal with parameters Г„вҗҜj4. The row effects and column effects models were developed by Goodman ЕҪ1979a., Haberman ЕҪ1974b., and Simon ЕҪ1974..

9.5.2 Logit Model for Adjacent Responses
With Г„В®jq1 y В®j s 14, the row effects model has adjacent-categories logit form

PЕҪY s j q 1 < X s i. log P ЕҪ Y s j < X s i. s вҗЈj q вҗ®i .

ЕҪ 9 .9.

The effect in row i is identical for each pair of adjacent responses. Plots of these logits against i ЕҪi s 1, . . . , I . for different j are parallel. Goodman ЕҪ1983. referred to model ЕҪ9.9. as the parallel odds model.
Differences among Г„вҗ®i4 compare rows with respect to their conditional distributions on Y. When вҗ®i s вҗ®h, rows h and i have identical conditional distributions. If вҗ®i ) вҗ®h, Y is stochastically higher in row i than row h.
The likelihood equations for the row effects model ЕҪ9.8. are Г„вҗ®ЛҶiqs niq4, Г„вҗ®ЛҶqj s nqj 4, and
Гқ В®j вҗ®ЛҶi j s Гқ В®j ni j , i s 1, . . . , I.
j
Let вҗІЛҶj<i s вҗ®ЛҶi jrвҗ®ЛҶiq and pj<i s ni jrniq. Since вҗ®ЛҶiqs niq, the third likelihood equation is ГқjВ®jвҗІЛҶj < i s ГқjВ®j pj < i. For the conditional distribution within each
row, the mean column score is the same for the fitted and sample distributions. The likelihood equations are solved using iterative methods.

ASSOCIATION MODELS

375

TABLE 9.5 Observed Frequencies and Fitted Values for Political Ideology Data

Political Ideology a

Party Affiliation

Liberal

Moderate

Conservative

Total

Democrat

143 ЕҪ102.0.1 ЕҪ136.6.2

156 ЕҪ161.4. ЕҪ168.7.

100

399

ЕҪ135.6.

ЕҪ93.6.

Independent

119 ЕҪ120.2. ЕҪ123.8.

210 ЕҪ190.1. ЕҪ200.4.

141

470

ЕҪ159.7.

ЕҪ145.8.

Republican

15 ЕҪ54.7. ЕҪ16.6.

72 ЕҪ86.6. ЕҪ68.9.

127

214

ЕҪ72.7.

ЕҪ128.6.

a1 Independence model; 2 row effects model. Source: Based on data in R. D. Hedlund, Public Opinion Quart. 41: 498бҺҗ514 ЕҪ1978..

9.5.3 Political Ideology Example
Table 9.5 displays the relationship between political ideology and political party affiliation for a sample of voters in a presidential primary in Wisconsin. The table shows fitted values for the independence ЕҪ I . model and the row effects ЕҪ R. model with Г„В®j s j4.
Table 9.6 shows output. Goodness-of-fit tests show that independence is inadequate. Adding the row effects parameters much improves the fit ЕҪG2ЕҪ I . s 105.7, df s 4; G2ЕҪ R. s 2.8, df s 2.. Also, testing H0: вҗ®1 s вҗ®2 s вҗ®3 using G2ЕҪ I < R. s 102.9 ЕҪdf s 2. shows very strong evidence of an association. In Table 9.5, the improved fit is especially noticeable at the ends of the ordinal scale, where the model has greatest deviation from independence.
The output uses dummy variables for the first two categories of each classification. The interaction term equals the product of the score for ideology and a parameter for party. Thus, the row effect estimates satisfy
вҗ®ЛҶ3 s 0, and the other two estimates contrast the first two parties with Republicans. The estimates are вҗ®ЛҶ1 s y1.213 and вҗ®ЛҶ2 s y0.943. The further вҗ®ЛҶi falls in the negative direction, the greater the tendency for the party i to
locate at the liberal end of the ideology scale, relative to Republicans. In this sample the Republicans are much more conservative than the other two groups, and the Democrats ЕҪrow 1. are the most liberal. From ЕҪ9.9. the model predicts constant odds ratios for adjacent columns of political ideology. For
instance, since вҗ®ЛҶ3 y вҗ®ЛҶ1 s 1.213, the estimated odds that Republicans were
conservative instead of moderate, or moderate instead of liberal, were expЕҪ1.213. s 3.36 times the corresponding estimated odds for Democrats. Figure 9.3 shows the parallelism of the estimated logits for the row effects model.
The loglinear model does not distinguish between response and explanatory variables. Instead, one could use a cumulative logit model to describe

376

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.6 Output for Fitting Row Effects Model to Table 9.5

Criteria For Assessing Goodness Of Fit

Criterion

DF

Value

Deviance

2

2.8149

Pearson Chi- Square

2

2.8039

Parameter Intercept party party party ideology ideology ideology score*party score*party score*party

Democ Indep Repub 1 2 3 Democ Indep Repub

Estimate 4.8565 3.3230 2.9536 0.0000
y2.0488 y0.6244
0.0000 y1.2134 y0.9426
0.0000

Std Error 0.0858 0.3188 0.3149 0.0000 0.2216 0.1139 0.0000 0.1304 0.1260 0.0000

Wald 95% Conf. Limits
4.6883 5.0246 2.6981 3.9479 2.3364 3.5707 0.0000 0.0000 y2.4831 y1.6145 y0.8476 y0.4013 0.0000 0.0000 y1.4690 y0.9577 y1.1896 y0.6956 0.0000 0.0000

ChiSquare 3204.02 108.63
87.98 .
85.50 30.08
. 86.56 55.95
.

Pr )
ChiSq -.0001 -.0001 -.0001
. -.0001 -.0001
. -.0001 -.0001
.

LR Statistics

Source

DF

Chi- Square

Pr ) ChiSq

score*party

2

102.85

-.0001

FIGURE 9.3 Observed and predicted logits for adjacent response categories.

ASSOCIATION MODELS

377

the effects of party affiliation on ideology, or a baseline-category logit model to describe linear effects of ideology on party affiliation.

9.5.4 Ordinal Variables in Models for Multiway Tables

Multidimensional tables with ordinal responses can use generalizations of
association models. In three dimensions, the rich collection of models includes ЕҪ1. association models that are more parsimonious than the nominal model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., and ЕҪ2. models permitting heterogeneous association that, unlike model ЕҪ XYZ., are unsaturated.
Models for association that are special cases of ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. replace вҗӯ
association terms by structured terms that account for ordinality. For instance, when both X and Y are ordinal, alternatives to вҗӯi jX Y are a linear-bylinear term вҗӨ uiВ®j, a row effects term вҗ®iВ®j, or a column effects term uiвҗҜj; these provide a stochastic ordering of conditional distributions within rows
and within columns, or just within rows, or just within columns. With a
linear-by-linear term, the model is

log

вҗ®i jk

s

вҗӯ

q

вҗӯ

X i

q вҗӯjY

q вҗӯkZ

q вҗӨ uiВ®j

q вҗӯi kX Z

q вҗӯY Z jk .

ЕҪ 9 .10.

The conditional local odds ratios ЕҪ8.13. then satisfy

log вҗӘi jЕҪk. s вҗӨ ЕҪ uiq1 y ui . ЕҪ В®jq1 y В®j . for all k.

The association is the same in different partial tables, with homogeneous linear-by-linear XY association.
When the association is heterogeneous, structured terms for ordinal variables make effects simpler to interpret than in the saturated model. For instance, the heterogeneous linear-by-linear XY association model

log

вҗ®i jk

s

вҗӯ

q

вҗӯ

X i

q вҗӯjY

q вҗӯkZ

q вҗӨk uiВ®j

q вҗӯi kX Z

q вҗӯjkY Z

ЕҪ 9 .11.

allows the XY association to change across levels of Z. With unit-spaced scores,
log вҗӘi jЕҪk. s вҗӨk for all i and j.

It has uniform association within each level of Z, but heterogeneity among levels of Z in the strength of association. Fitting it corresponds to fitting the L = L model ЕҪ9.6. separately at each level of Z.

9.5.5 Air Pollution and Breathing Examples Table 9.7 displays associations among smoking status ЕҪS., breathing test results ЕҪ B., and age ЕҪ A. for workers in certain industrial plants in Houston,

378

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.7 Cross-Classification of Industrial Workers by Breathing Test Results

Age

Smoking Status

Normal

Breathing Test Results

Borderline

Abnormal

- 40

Never smoked

577

27

7

Former smoker

192

20

3

Current smoker

682

46

11

40бҺҗ59

Never smoked

164

4

0

Former smoker

145

15

7

Current smoker

245

47

27

Source: From p. 21 of Public Program Analysis by R. N. Forthofer and R. G. Lehnen. Copyright б®Ҡ 1981 by Lifetime Learning Publications, Belmont, CA 94002, a division of Wadsworth, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Van Nostrand Reinhold. All rights reserved.

Texas. The loglinear model ЕҪSA, SB, BA. fits poorly ЕҪG2 s 25.9, df s 4.. Thus, simpler models such as homogeneous linear-by-linear SB association are not plausible ЕҪG2 s 29.1, df s 7, using equally spaced scores.. The heterogeneous linear-by-linear SB association model fits much better with only one additional parameter ЕҪG2 s 10.8, df s 6.. With integer scores for S
and B, вҗӨЛҶ1 s 0.115 for the younger group and вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.781 for the older group,
with SE s 0.167 for the difference. The effect of smoking seems much stronger for the older group, with estimated local odds ratio of expЕҪ0.781. s 2.18 compared to expЕҪ0.115. s 1.12 for the younger group. Here, it may be more natural to use logit models with B as the response variable ЕҪProblem 7.11..
When strata are ordered, roughly a linear trend may exist across strata in certain log odds ratios as Table 9.8 illustrates. The data refer to a sample of coal miners, measured on B s breathlessness, W s wheeze, and A s age, where B and W are response variables. One could use a separate logit model to describe effects of age on each response. To study whether the BW association varies by age, we fit model ЕҪ BW, AB, AW .. It has residual G2 s 26.7, with df s 8. Table 9.8 reports the standardized Pearson residuals. They show a decreasing tendency as age increases.
This suggests the model

log вҗ®i jk s ЕҪ BW , AB, AW . q kI ЕҪ i s j s 1. вҗҰ ,

ЕҪ 9 .12.

where I is the indicator function. It amends the homogeneous association model by adding вҗҰ in the cell for вҗ®111, . . . , 9вҗҰ in the cell for вҗ®119 . Then, the BW log odds ratio changes linearly in the age category. The model fit has
вҗҰЛҶs y0.131 ЕҪSE s 0.029.. The estimated BW log odds ratio at level k of age
is 3.676 y 0.131k, decreasing from 3.55 to 2.50. The model has residual G2 s 6.80 ЕҪdf s 7.. McCullagh and Nelder ЕҪ1989, Sec. 6.6. showed other
analyses.

ASSOCIATION, CORRELATION, AND CORRESPONDENCE MODELS

379

TABLE 9.8 Coal Miners Classified by Breathlessness, Wheeze, and Age

Breathlessness

Yes

No

Wheeze

Wheeze

Wheeze

Wheeze

Std. Pearson

Age

Yes

No

Yes

No

Residual a

20бҺҗ24

9

7

95

1841

0.75

25бҺҗ29

23

9

105

1654

2.20

30бҺҗ34

54

19

177

1863

2.10

35бҺҗ39

121

48

257

2357

1.77

40бҺҗ44

169

54

273

1778

1.13

45бҺҗ49

269

88

324

1712

y0.42

50бҺҗ54

404

117

245

1324

0.81

55бҺҗ59

406

152

225

967

y3.65

60бҺҗ64

372

106

132

526

y1.44

aResidual refers to yesбҺҗyes and noбҺҗno cells; reverse sign for yesбҺҗno and noбҺҗyes cells. Source: Reprinted with permission from Ashford and Sowden ЕҪ1970..

9.5.6 Other Ordinal Tests of Conditional Independence
Tests of conditional independence of ordinal classifications can generalize G2ЕҪ I < L = L.. For instance, one can compare the XY conditional independence model ЕҪ XZ, YZ. to the homogeneous linear-by-linear XY association model ЕҪ9.10.. It tests вҗӨ s 0 in that model, with df s 1. This is an alternative to the ordinal test of conditional independence in Section 7.5.3. Like MantelвҖҷs score statistic ЕҪ7.21., this statistic uses correlation information, since ГқkЕҪГқiГқj uiВ®j ni jk . is the sufficient statistic for вҗӨ in model ЕҪ9.10.. In fact, the Mantel statistic provides the score test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 in that model.
Exact, small-sample tests can use likelihood-ratio, score, or Wald statistics for such models. Computations require special algorithms ЕҪAgresti et al. 1990; Kim and Agresti 1997..

9.6 ASSOCIATION MODELS, CORRELATION MODELS, AND CORRESPONDENCE ANALYSIS*
The linear-by-linear association ЕҪ L = L. model is a special case of the row effects ЕҪ R. model, which has parameter row scores, and the column effects ЕҪC. model, which has parameter column scores. These models are special cases of a more general model with row and column parameter scores.

9.6.1 Multiplicative Row and Column Effects Model

Replacing Г„ui4 and Г„В®j4 in the L = L model ЕҪ9.6. by parameters yields the row and column effects ЕҪ RC. model ЕҪGoodman 1979a.

log вҗ®i j s вҗӯ q вҗӯiX q вҗӯjY q вҗӨвҗ®iвҗҜj .

ЕҪ 9 .13.

380

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

Identifiability requires location and scale constraints on Г„вҗ®i4 and Г„вҗҜj4. The residual df s ЕҪ I y 2.ЕҪ J y 2.. This model is not loglinear, because the predictor is a multiplicative ЕҪrather than linear. function of parameters вҗ®i and вҗҜj. It treats classifications as nominal; the same fit results from a permutation of rows or columns. Parameter interpretation is simplest when at least one variable is ordinal, through the local log odds ratios
logвҗӘi j s вҗӨ ЕҪ вҗ®iq1 y вҗ®i . ЕҪ вҗҜjq1 y вҗҜj . .

Although it may seem appealing to use parameters instead of arbitrary scores, the RC model presents complications that do not occur with loglinear models. The likelihood may not be concave and may have local maxima. Independence is a special case, but it is awkward to test independence using the RC model. Haberman ЕҪ1981. showed that the null distribution of G2ЕҪ I . y G2ЕҪ RC. is not chi-squared but rather that of the maximum eigenvalue from a Wishart matrix.
When one set of parameter scores is fixed, the RC model simplifies to the R or C model. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. suggested an iterative model-fitting algorithm that exploits this. A cycle of the algorithm has two steps. First, for some initial guess of Г„вҗҜj4, it estimates the row scores as in the R model. Then, treating the estimated row scores from the first step as fixed, it estimates the column scores as in the C model. Those estimates serve as fixed column scores in the first step of the next cycle, for reestimating the row scores in the R model. There is no guarantee of convergence to ML estimates, but this seems to happen when the model fits well. Haberman ЕҪ1995. provided more sophisticated fitting methods for association models.
Goodman ЕҪ1985. expressed the association term in the saturated model in a form that generalizes the вҗӨвҗ®iвҗҜj term in the RC model, namely,

M
вҗӯi jX Y s Гқ вҗӨk вҗ®ik вҗҜjk
ks1

ЕҪ 9 .14.

where M s minЕҪ I y 1, J y 1.. The parameters satisfy constraints such as

Гқ вҗ®ikвҗІ iqs Гқ вҗҜjkвҗІqj s 0

i

j

Гқ вҗ®ik2 вҗІ iqs Гқ вҗҜjk2 вҗІqj s 1

i

j

Гқ вҗ®ik вҗ®ihвҗІ iqs Гқ вҗҜjk вҗҜjhвҗІqj s 0

i

j

for all k, for all k, for all k / h.

ЕҪ 9 .15.

When вҗӨk s 0 for k ) M*, model ЕҪ9.14. is called the RCЕҪ M*. model. See Becker ЕҪ1990. for ML model fitting. The RC model ЕҪ9.13. is the case M* s 1.

ASSOCIATION, CORRELATION, AND CORRESPONDENCE MODELS

381

TABLE 9.9 Cross-Classification of Mental Health Status and Socioeconomic Status

ParentsвҖҷ Socioeconomic Status
A ЕҪhigh. B C D E F ЕҪlow.

Well
64 57 57 72 36 21

Mental Health Status

Mild Symptom Formation

Moderate Symptom Formation

94

58

94

54

105

65

141

77

97

54

71

54

Impaired
46 40 60 94 78 71

Source: Reprinted with permission from L. Srole et al. Mental Health in the Metropolis: The Midtown Manhattan Study, ЕҪNew York: NYU Press, 1978., p. 289.

9.6.2 Mental Health Status Example
Table 9.9 describes the relationship between childвҖҷs mental impairment and parentsвҖҷ socioeconomic status for a sample of residents of Manhattan ЕҪGoodman 1979a.. The RC model fits well ЕҪG2 s 3.6, df s 8.. For scaling ЕҪ9.15., the ML estimates are ЕҪy1.11, y1.12, y0.37, 0.03, 1.01, 1.82. for the row
scores, ЕҪy1.68, y0.14, 0.14, 1.41. for the column scores, and вҗӨЛҶs 0.17. Nearly
all estimated local log odds ratios are positive, indicating a tendency for mental health to be better at higher levels of parentsвҖҷ SES.
Ordinal loglinear models also fit well. For equal-interval scores, G2ЕҪ L = L. s 9.9 ЕҪdf s 14.. The statistic G2ЕҪ L = L < RC. s 6.3 ЕҪdf s 6. tests that row and column scores in the RC model are equal-interval. The parameter scores do not provide a significantly better fit. It is sufficient to use a uniform
local odds ratio to describe the table. For unit-spaced scores, вҗӨЛҶs 0.091
ЕҪSE s 0.015., so the fitted local odds ratio is expЕҪ0.091. s 1.09. There is strong evidence of positive association, but the degree of association is rather weak, at least locally.

9.6.3 Correlation Models A correlation model for two-way tables has many features in common with the RC model ЕҪGoodman 1985.. In its simplest form, it is

вҗІ i j s вҗІ iqвҗІqj ЕҪ1 q вҗӯвҗ®iвҗҜj . ,

ЕҪ 9 .16.

where Г„вҗ®i4 and Г„вҗҜi4 are score parameters satisfying

Гқ вҗ®iвҗІ iqs Гқ вҗҜjвҗІqj s 0

and

Гқ

вҗ®2iвҗІ iqs

Гқ

2
вҗҜj вҗІqj

s

1.

382

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

The parameter вҗӯ is the correlation between the scores for joint distribution ЕҪ9.16..
The correlation model is also called the canonical correlation model, because ML estimates of the scores maximize the correlation for ЕҪ9.16.. The general canonical correlation model is
Еҫ / M
вҗІ i j s вҗІ iqвҗІqj 1 q Гқ вҗӯk вҗ®ik вҗҜjk
ks1
where 0 F вҗӯM F РёРёРё F вҗӯ1 F 1 and with constraints such as in ЕҪ9.15.. The parameter вҗӯk is the correlation between Г„вҗ®ik , i s 1, . . . , I4 and Г„вҗҜjk , j s 1, . . . , J 4. The Г„вҗ®i14 and Г„вҗҜj14 are standardized scores that maximize the correlation вҗӯ1 for the joint distribution; Г„вҗ®i24 and Г„вҗҜj24 are standardized scores that maximize the correlation вҗӯ2 , subject to Г„вҗ®i14 and Г„вҗ®i24 being uncorrelated and Г„вҗҜj14 and Г„вҗҜj24 being uncorrelated, and so on.
Unsaturated models result from replacing M by M* - minЕҪ I y 1, J y 1.. Gilula and Haberman ЕҪ1986. and Goodman ЕҪ1985. discussed ML fitting. When вҗӯ is close to zero in ЕҪ9.16., Goodman ЕҪ1981a, 1985, 1986. noted that ML estimates of вҗӯ and the score parameters are similar to those of вҗӨ and the score parameters in the RC model. Correlation models can also use fixed scores instead of parameter scores.
Goodman discussed advantages of association models over correlation models. The correlation model is not defined for all possible combinations of score values because of the constraint 0 F вҗІi j F 1, ML fitted values do not have the same marginal totals as the observed data, and the model is not simply generalizable to multiway tables. Gilula and Haberman ЕҪ1988. analyzed multiway tables with correlation models by treating explanatory variables as a single variable and response variables as a second variable.

9.6.4 Correspondence Analysis
Correspondence analysis is a graphical way to represent associations in two-way contingency tables. The rows and columns are represented by points on a graph, the positions of which indicate associations. Goodman ЕҪ1985, 1986. noted that coordinates of the points are reparameterizations of Г„вҗ®ik4 and Г„вҗҜjk4 in the general canonical correlation model. Correspondence analysis uses adjusted scores

xik s вҗӯk вҗ®ik ,

yjk s вҗӯkвҗҜjk .

These are close to zero for dimensions k in which the correlation вҗӯk is close to zero. A correspondence analysis graph uses the first two dimensions, plotting ЕҪ xi1, xi2 . for each row and ЕҪ yj1, yj2 . for each column.

ASSOCIATION, CORRELATION, AND CORRESPONDENCE MODELS

383

TABLE 9.10 Scores from Correspondence Analysis Applied to Table 9.9

Column Score

Dimension

1

2

3

Row Score

Dimension

1

2

3

1

0.260 0.012 0.023

1

0.181 y0.018 0.028

2

0.030 0.024 y0.019

2

0.185 y0.011 y0.026

3

y0.013 y0.069 y0.002

3

0.059 y0.021 y0.010

4

y0.236 0.019 0.016

4

y0.008 0.042 0.011

5

y0.164 0.044 y0.009

6

y0.287 y0.061 0.005

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, based on Goodman ЕҪ1985..

Goodman ЕҪ1985, 1986. used Table 9.9 to illustrate the similarities of correspondence analysis to analyses using correlation models and association models. For the general canonical correlation model, M s minЕҪ I y 1, J y 1. s 3. Its estimated squared correlations are ЕҪ0.0260, 0.0014, and 0.0003.. The association is rather weak. Table 9.10 contains estimated row and column scores for the correspondence analysis of these three dimensions. Both sets of scores in the first dimension fall in a monotone increasing pattern, except for a slight discrepancy between the first two row scores. This indicates an overall positive association. The scores for the second and third dimension
are close to zero, reflecting the relatively small вҗӯЛҶ2 and вҗӯЛҶ3.
Figure 9.4 exhibits the results of the correspondence analysis. The horizontal axis has estimates for the first dimension, and the vertical axis has estimates for the second dimension. Six points ЕҪcircles. represent the six
rows, with point i giving ЕҪ ЛҶxi1, ЛҶxi2 .. Similarly, four points ЕҪsquares. display the estimates ЕҪ ЛҶyj1, ЛҶyj2 .. Both sets of points lie close to the horizontal axis, since
the first dimension is more important than the second.

FIGURE 9.4 Graphical display of scores from first two dimensions of correspondence analysis. wBased on Escoufier ЕҪ1982.; reprinted with permission.x

384

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

Row points that are close together represent rows with similar conditional distributions across the columns. Close column points represent columns with similar conditional distributions across rows. Row points close to column points represent combinations that are more likely than expected under independence. Figure 9.4 shows a tendency for subjects at the high end of one scale to be at the high end of the other and for subjects at the low end of one to be at the low end of the other.
Correspondence analysis is used mainly as a descriptive tool. Goodman ЕҪ1986. developed inferential methods for it. For Table 9.9, inferential analysis reveals that the first dimension, accounting for 94% of the total squared correlation, is adequate for describing the association. Goodman argued for choosing the unsaturated model employing only one dimension and having graphics display fitted scores for that dimension alone. Then, correspondence analysis is equivalent to a ML analysis using correlation model ЕҪ9.16.. The estimated scores for that model are ЕҪy1.09, y1.17, y0.37, 0.05, 1.01, 1.80. for the rows and ЕҪy1.60, y0.19, 0.09, 1.48. for the columns. The model fits well ЕҪG2 s 2.75, df s 8.. The quality of fit and the estimated scores are similar to those we saw in Section 9.6.2 for the RC model. More parsimonious correlation models also fit these data well, such as ones using equally spaced scores.
All analyses of Table 9.9 have yielded similar conclusions about the association. They all neglect, however, that mental health is a natural response variable. It may make more sense to use an ordinal logit model.
Like correlation models, a severe limitation of correspondence analysis is nontrivial generalization to multiway tables. Greenacre ЕҪ1993. showed displays of several pairwise associations in a single plot.

9.6.5 Model Selection and Score Choice for Ordinal Variables
The past three sections showed several ways to use category orderings in model building. With allowance for ordinal effects, the variety of potential models is much greater than standard loglinear models. To choose among models, one approach uses the standard models for guidance. If a standard model fits well, simplify by replacing some parameters with structured terms for ordinal classifications.
Association, correlation, and correspondence analysis models have scores for categories of ordinal variables. Parameter interpretations are simplest for equally spaced scores. With parameter scores, the resulting ML estimates of scores need not be monotone. Constrained versions of the models force monotonicity by maximizing the likelihood subject to order restrictions ЕҪe.g., Agresti et al. 1987; Ritov and Gilula 1991.. Disadvantages exist, however, of treating scores as parameters. The model becomes less parsimonious, and tests of effects may be less powerful because of a greater df value ЕҪrecall Section 6.4.3.. When one variable alone is a response, cumulative link models

POISSON REGRESSION FOR RATES

385

ЕҪSections 7.2 and 7.3. for that response do not require preassigned or parameter scores.

9.7 POISSON REGRESSION FOR RATES
Loglinear models need not refer to contingency tables. In Section 4.3 we introduced Poisson regression for modeling counts. When outcomes occur over time, space, or some other index of size, it is more relevant to model their rate of occurrence than their raw number.

9.7.1 Analyzing Rates Using Loglinear Models with Offsets

When a response count ni has index equal to ti, the sample rate is nirti. Its expected value is вҗ®irti. With an explanatory variable x, a loglinear model for the expected rate has form

logЕҪ вҗ®irti . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .

ЕҪ 9 .17.

This model has equivalent representation

log вҗ®i y log ti s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi .

As noted in Section 8.7.4, the adjustment term, ylog ti, to the log link of the mean is called an offset. The fit correspond to using log ti as a predictor on the right-hand side and forcing its coefficient to equal 1.0.
For model ЕҪ9.17., the expected response count satisfies
вҗ®i s ti expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xi . .

The mean is proportional to the index, with proportionality constant depending on the value of x. The identity link is also sometimes useful. The model is then
вҗ®irti s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xi , or вҗ®i s вҗЈ ti q вҗӨ xi ti .

This does not require an offset. It corresponds to an ordinary Poisson GLM using identity link with ti and xi ti as explanatory variables and no intercept. It provides additive, rather than multiplicative, predictor effects. It is less useful with many predictors, as the fitting process may fail because of negative fitted counts at some iteration.

9.7.2 Modeling Death Rates for Heart Valve Operations
Laird and Olivier ЕҪ1981. analyzed patient survival after heart valve replacement operations. A sample of 109 patients were classified by type of heart

386

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.11 Data on Heart Valve Replacement Operations

Type of Heart Valve

Age

Aortic

Mitral

- 55

Deaths Time at risk Death rate

4 1259 0.0032

55 q

Deaths Time at risk Death rate

7 1417 0.0049

Source: Reprinted with permission, based on data in Laird and Olivier ЕҪ1981..

1 2082 0.0005
9 1647 0.0055

valve ЕҪaortic, mitral. and by age ЕҪ- 55, G 55.. Follow-up observations occurred until the patient died or the study ended. Operations occurred throughout the study period, and follow-up observations covered lengths of time varying from 3 to 97 months. The response was whether the subject died and the follow-up time. For subjects who died, this is the time after the operation until death; for the others, it is the time until the study ended or the subject withdrew from it.
Table 9.11 lists the numbers of deaths during the follow-up period, by valve type and age. These counts are the first layer of a three-way contingency table that classifies valve type, age, and whether died ЕҪyes, no.. The subjects not tabulated in Table 9.11 were not observed to die. They are censored, since we know only a lower bound for how long they lived after the operation. It is inappropriate to analyze that 2 = 2 = 2 table using binary GLMs for the probability of death, since subjects had differing times at risk; it is not sensible to treat a subject who could be observed for 3 months and a subject who could be observed for 97 months as identical trials with the same probability. To use age and valve type as predictors in a model for frequency of death, the proper baseline is not the number of subjects but rather the total time that subjects were at risk. Thus, we model the rate of death.
The time at risk for a subject is their follow-up time of observation. For a given age and valve type, the total time at risk is the sum of the times at risk for all subjects in that cell ЕҪthose who died and those censored.. Table 9.11 lists those total times in months. The sample rate, also shown in that table, divides the number of deaths by total time at risk. For instance, 4 deaths in 1259 months of observation occurred for younger subjects with aortic valve replacement, so their sample rate is 4r1259 s 0.0032.
We now model effects of age and valve type on the rate. Let a be a dummy variable for age, with a1 s 0 for the younger age group and a2 s 1 for the older group. Let В® be a dummy variable for valve type, with В®1 s 0 for aortic and В®2 s 1 for mitral. Let ni j denote the number of deaths for age ai and valve type В®j, with expected value вҗ®i j for total time at risk ti j. Given ti j,

POISSON REGRESSION FOR RATES

387

TABLE 9.12 Fit to Table 9.11 for Poisson Regression Models

Log Link

Identity Link

Age

Aortic

Mitral

Aortic

Mitral

- 55 55 q

Number of deaths Death rate
Number of deaths Death rate

2.28 0.0018
8.72 0.0062

2.72 0.0013
7.28 0.0044

3.16 0.0025
9.17 0.0065

1.19 0.0006
7.48 0.0046

the expected rate is вҗ®i jrti j. The model
logЕҪ вҗ®i jrti j . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 ai q вҗӨ2В®j

ЕҪ 9 .18.

assumes a lack of interaction in the effects. Model fitting uses standard iterative methods, treating Г„ni j4 as indepen-
dent Poisson variates with means Г„вҗ®i j4. This is done conditional on Г„ti j4. Table 9.12 presents the fitted death counts and estimated rates. The estimated effects are
вҗӨЛҶ1 s 1.221 ЕҪSE s 0.514. , вҗӨЛҶ2 s y0.330 ЕҪSE s 0.438. .

There is evidence of an age effect. Given valve type, the estimated rate for the older age group is expЕҪ1.221. s 3.4 times that for the younger age group. The 95% Wald confidence interval for вҗӨ1 of 1.221 " 1.96ЕҪ0.514. translates to ЕҪ1.2, 9.3. for the true multiplicative effect expЕҪвҗӨ1.. ЕҪThe likelihood-ratio confidence interval is ЕҪ1.3, 10.4... The study contains much censored data. Of the 109 patients, only 21 died during the study period. Both effect estimates are imprecise. Note, though, that the analysis uses all 109 patients through their contributions to the times at risk.
Goodness-of-fit statistics comparing Г„ni j4 to fitted values Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j4 are G2 s 3.2
and X 2 s 3.1. The residual df s 1, since the four response counts have three parameters. The mild evidence of lack of fit corresponds to evidence of interaction between valve type and age. However, the model without valvetype effects wi.e., вҗӨ2 s 0 in ЕҪ9.18.x fits nearly as well, with G2 s 3.8 and X 2 s 3.8 ЕҪdf s 2.. Models omitting age effects fit poorly.
The corresponding model with identity link
вҗ®i j s вҗЈ ti j q вҗӨ1 ai ti j q вҗӨ2В®j ti j
shows a good fit, with G2 s 1.1 and X 2 s 1.1 ЕҪdf s 1.. Table 9.12 shows the
fit. Substantive conclusions are similar. The estimate вҗӨЛҶ1 s 0.0040 ЕҪSE s
0.0014. then represents an estimated difference in death rates between the older and younger age groups for each valve type.

388

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

9.7.3 Modeling Survival Times*
A method for modeling survival times relates to the Poisson loglinear model for rates. This method focuses on times until death rather than on numbers of deaths. Let T denote the time to some event, such as death or such as product failure in a reliability study. Let f ЕҪt. denote the probability density function ЕҪpdf. and FЕҪt. the cdf of T. A connection exists between ML estimation using a Poisson likelihood for numbers of events and a negative exponential likelihood for T ЕҪAitkin and Clayton 1980..
A subject having T s t contributes f ЕҪt. to the likelihood. For a subject whose censoring time equals t, we know only that T ) t. Thus, this subject contributes PЕҪT ) t. s 1 y FЕҪt.. Using the indicator wi s 1 for death and 0 for censoring for subject i, the survival-time likelihood for n independent observations is
n
ЕҒ f ЕҪ ti . wi 1 y F ЕҪ ti . 1yw i .
is1

The log likelihood equals

Гқ wilog f ЕҪ ti . q Гқ ЕҪ1 y wi . log 1 y F ЕҪ ti . .

i

i

ЕҪ 9 .19.

Further analysis requires a parametric form for f and a model for the dependence of its parameters on explanatory variables.
Most survival models focus on the rate at which death occurs rather than on EЕҪT .. The hazard function

hЕҪ t . s s f ЕҪ t . lim P w t - T - t q в‘Җ < T ) t x

1 y F ЕҪ t . в‘Җ x0

в‘Җ

represents the instantaneous rate of death for subjects who have survived to time t. A simple density for survival modeling is the negative exponential. The pdf is
f ЕҪ t . s вҗӯeyвҗӯ t, t ) 0.

The cdf is FЕҪt. s 1 y eyвҗӯ t for t ) 0, and EЕҪT . s вҗӯy1. The hazard function is
hЕҪ t. s вҗӯ, t ) 0,

constant for all t. Now we include explanatory variables x. Suppose that the hazard function
for a negative exponential survival distribution is

hЕҪ t ; x. s вҗӯexpЕҪ вҗӨX x. .

ЕҪ 9 .20.

POISSON REGRESSION FOR RATES

389

That is, the distribution for T has parameter depending on x through ЕҪ9.20.. The choice of functional form ЕҪ9.20. for explanatory variable effects ensures the hazard is nonnegative at all x. For instance, loglinear model ЕҪ9.18. corresponds to a multiplicative model of type ЕҪ9.20. for the rate itself.
Now, consider the log likelihood ЕҪ9.19. with f ЕҪt. equal to the negative exponential density with parameter вҗӯ expЕҪвҗӨX x.. For subject i, let
X
вҗ®i s ti вҗӯ expЕҪ вҗӨ x i . .

With this substitution, the log likelihood simplifies to

Гқ wi log вҗ®i y Гқ вҗ®i y Гқ wi log ti .

i

i

i

The first two terms involve вҗӨ. This part is identical to the log likelihood for independent Poisson variates Г„wi4 with expected values Г„вҗ®i4. In this application Г„wi4 are binary rather than Poisson, but that is irrelevant to the process of maximizing with respect to вҗӨ. This process is equivalent to maximizing the

likelihood for the Poisson loglinear model

X
log вҗ®i y log ti s log вҗӯ q вҗӨ x i

with offset logЕҪti., using observations Г„wi4. When we sum terms in the log likelihood for subjects having a common value of x, the observed data are the numbers of deaths ЕҪГқwi. at each setting of x, and the offset is the log of ЕҪГқti. at each setting.

The assumption of constant hazard over time is often not sensible. As

products wear out, their failure rate increases. A generalization divides the

time scale into disjoint time intervals and assumes constant hazard in each,

namely,

hЕҪ t ; x. s вҗӯk expЕҪ вҗӨX x.

for t in interval k, k s 1, . . . . A separate hazard rate applies to each piece of the time scale. Consider the contingency table for numbers of deaths, in which one dimension is a discrete time scale and other dimensions represent categorical explanatory variables. Holford ЕҪ1980. and Laird and Olivier ЕҪ1981. showed that Poisson loglinear models and likelihoods for this table are equivalent to loglinear hazard models and likelihoods that assume piecewise exponential hazards for the survival times.
For short time intervals, the piecewise exponential approach is essentially nonparametric, making no assumption about the dependence of the hazard on time. This suggests the generalization of model ЕҪ9.20. that replaces вҗӯ by an unspecified function вҗӯЕҪt., so that
hЕҪ t ; x. s вҗӯЕҪ t . expЕҪ вҗӨX x. .

This is the Cox proportional hazards model. Its ratio of hazards
X
hЕҪ t ; x1 . rhЕҪ t ; x 2 . s exp вҗӨ ЕҪx1 y x 2 .

is the same for all t.

390

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

TABLE 9.13 Number of Deaths from Lung Cancer

Follow-up

Histology a

Time

Interval Disease

I

II

III

ЕҪmonths. Stage:

1

2

3 12 3 12

3

0бҺҗ2 2бҺҗ4 4бҺҗ6 6бҺҗ8 8бҺҗ10 10бҺҗ12 12 q

9 12 42 5 4 28 1 1 19 ЕҪ157 134 212 77 71 130 21 22 101.

2

7 26 2 3 19 1 1 11

ЕҪ139 110 136 68 63 72 17 18 63.

9

5 12 3 5 10 1 3

7

ЕҪ126 96 90 63 58 42 14 14 43.

10 10 10 2 4

511

6

ЕҪ102 86 64 55 42 21 12 10 32.

1

4

522

000

3

ЕҪ88 66 47 50 35 14 10 8 21.

3

3

421

310

3

ЕҪ82 59 39 45 32 13 8 8 14.

1

4

124

ЕҪ76 51 29 42 28

202

3

7 6 6 10.

aValues in parentheses represent total follow-up. Source: Reprinted with permission from the Biometric Society, based on Holford ЕҪ1980..

9.7.4 Lung Cancer Survival Example*

Table 9.13 describes survival for 539 males diagnosed with lung cancer. The prognostic factors are histology ЕҪ H . and stage ЕҪS. of disease. For a piecewise exponential hazard approach, the time scale for follow-up ЕҪT . was divided

into two-month intervals.

Let вҗ®i jk denote the expected number of deaths and ti jk the total time at

risk for histology i and state of disease j, in follow-up time interval k. The

model

logЕҪ вҗ®i jkrti jk . s вҗӯ q вҗӯiH q вҗӯjS q вҗӯkT

ЕҪ 9 .21.

has residual G2 s 43.9 ЕҪdf s 52.. All models assuming no interaction between follow-up time interval and either prognostic factor are proportional hazards models, since they have the same effects of histology and stage of disease for each time interval. Table 9.14 summarizes results of fitting several such models. Although stage of disease is an important prognostic factor, histology did not contribute significant additional information.
For model ЕҪ9.21., the effects of stage of disease satisfy

вҗӯЛҶS2

y

вҗӯЛҶS
1

s

0.470

вҗӯЛҶS3

y

вҗӯЛҶS
1

s

1.324

ЕҪSE s 0.174. , ЕҪSE s 0.152. .

EMPTY CELLS AND SPARSENESS IN MODELING CONTINGENCY TABLES

391

TABLE 9.14 Results for Poisson Regression Models of Proportional Hazards Form with Table 9.13

Effects a

G2

df

T

170.7

56

TqH

143.1

54

TqS

45.8

54

TqSqH

43.9

52

TqSqHqS=H

41.5

48

aT, time scale for follow-up; H, histology; S, disease stage.

For instance, at a fixed follow-up time for a given histology, the estimated death rate at the third stage of disease is expЕҪ1.324. s 3.8 times that at the first stage. Adding interaction terms between stage and time does not significantly improve the fit ЕҪchange in G2 s 14.9, change in df s 12.. The
Г„вҗӯЛҶSj 4 are very similar for the simpler model without the histology effects.
9.7.5 Analyzing Weighted Data*
The process of fitting a loglinear model with an offset is also useful in other applications. For expected frequencies Г„вҗ®i4 and fixed constants Г„ti4, consider a model
logЕҪ вҗ®irti . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 xi1 q вҗӨ2 xi2 q РёРёРё .
Standard loglinear models have Г„ti s 14. The general form is useful for the analysis of categorical data with sampling designs more complex than simple random sampling.
Many surveys have sampling designs employing stratification andror clustering. Case weights inflate or deflate the influence of each observation according to features of that design. Adding the case weights for subjects in a particular cell i provides a total weighted frequency for that cell. The average cell weight zi is defined to be the total weighted frequency divided by the cell count. Conditional on Г„ zi4, loglinear models for the weighted expected frequencies Г„ zi вҗ®i s вҗ®irti4 with ti s zy1 i express the model as a standard loglinear model for Г„log вҗ®i4, with offset Г„log ti s ylog zi4. Fitting this model provides appropriate parameter estimates and standard errors ЕҪClogg and Eliason 1987..

9.8 EMPTY CELLS AND SPARSENESS IN MODELING CONTINGENCY TABLES
Contingency tables having small cell counts are said to be sparse. We end this chapter by discussing effects of sparse tables on model fitting. Sparse

392

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

tables occur when the sample size n is small. They also occur when n is large
but so is the number of cells. Sparseness is common in tables with many
variables. The following discussion refers to a generic contingency table and model, with cell counts Г„ni4 and expected frequencies Г„вҗ®i4 for n observations in N cells.

9.8.1 Empty Cells: Sampling versus Structural Zeros
Sparse tables usually contain cells with ni s 0. These empty cells are of two types: sampling zeros and structural zeros. In most cases, even though ni s 0, вҗ®i ) 0. It is possible to have observations in the cell, and ni ) 0 with sufficiently large n. This empty cell is called a sampling zero. The empty cells in Table 9.1 for the student survey are sampling zeros.
An empty cell in which observations are impossible is called a structural
zero. For such cells вҗ®i s 0 and necessarily вҗ®ЛҶi s 0 and ni s 0 regardless of n.
For a table that cross classifies cancer patients on their gender, race, and type of cancer, some cancers ЕҪe.g., prostate cancer, ovarian cancer. are gender specific. Thus, certain cells have structural zeros. Contingency tables with structural zeros are called incomplete tables.
Sampling zeros are part of the data set. A count of 0 is a permissible outcome for a Poisson or multinomial variate. It contributes to the likelihood function and model fitting. A structural zero, on the other hand, is not an observation and is not part of the data. Sampling zeros are much more common than structural zeros, and the remaining discussion refers to them.

9.8.2 Existence of Estimates in Loglinear r Logit Models
Sampling zeros can affect the existence of finite ML estimates of loglinear and logit model parameters. Haberman ЕҪ1973b, 1974a., generalizing work by Birch ЕҪ1963. and Fienberg ЕҪ1970b., studied this. Let n denote the vector of cell counts and вҗ® their expected values. Haberman showed results 1 through 5 for Poisson sampling, but by result 6 they apply also to multinomial sampling.
1. The log-likelihood function is a strictly concave function of log вҗ®. 2. If a ML estimate of вҗ® exists, it is unique and satisfies the likelihood
equations XX n s XXвҗ®ЛҶ . Conversely, if вҗ®ЛҶ satisfies the model and also the
likelihood equations, it is the ML estimate of вҗ®. 3. If all ni ) 0, ML estimates of loglinear model parameters exist. 4. Suppose that ML parameter estimates exist for a loglinear model that
equates observed and fitted counts in certain marginal tables. Then those marginal tables have uniformly positive counts. 5. If ML estimates exist for a model M, they also exist for any special case of M.

EMPTY CELLS AND SPARSENESS IN MODELING CONTINGENCY TABLES

393

6. For any loglinear model, the ML estimates вҗ®ЛҶ are identical for multino-
mial and independent Poisson sampling, and those estimates exist in the same situations.
To illustrate, consider the saturated model. By results 2 and 3, when all ni ) 0, the ML estimate of вҗ® is n. By result 4, parameter estimates do not
exist when any ni s 0. Model parameter estimates are contrasts of Г„log вҗ®ЛҶi4, and since вҗ®ЛҶ s n for the saturated model, the estimates are finite only when
all ni ) 0. For unsaturated models, by results 3 and 4 ML estimates exist when all
ni ) 0 and do not exist when any count is zero in the set of sufficient marginal tables. Suppose that at least one ni s 0 but the sufficient marginal counts are all positive. For hierarchical loglinear models, Glonek et al. ЕҪ1988. showed that the positivity of the sufficient counts implies the existence of ML estimates if and only if the model is decomposable ЕҪNote 8.2., which includes the conditional independence models. Models having all pairs of variables associated, however, are more complex. For model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., for instance, ML estimates exist when only one ni s 0 but may not exist when at least two cells are empty. For instance, ML estimates do not exist for Table 9.15, even though all sufficient statistics ЕҪthe two-way marginal totals. are positive ЕҪProblem 9.47..
Haberman showed that the supremum of the likelihood function is finite. This motivated him to define extended ML estimators of вҗ®. These always exist but may equal 0 and, falling on the boundary, need not have the same properties as regular ML estimators wsee also Baker et al. ЕҪ1985.x. A sequence of estimates satisfying the model that converges to the extended estimate has
log likelihood approaching its supremum. In this extended sense, вҗ®ЛҶi s 0 is
the ML estimate of вҗ®i for the saturated model when ni s 0, and one can have infinite loglinear parameter estimates.
When a sufficient marginal count for a factor equals zero, infinite estimates occur for that term. For instance, when a XY marginal total equals
zero, infinite estimates occur among Г„вҗӯЛҶX Y i j 4 for loglinear models such as ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., and infinite estimates occur among Г„ вҗӨЛҶiX 4 for the effect of X
on Y in logit models. Sometimes, however, not even infinite estimates exist. An example is estimating the log odds ratio when both entries in a row or column of a 2 = 2 table equal 0.

TABLE 9.15 Data for Which ML Estimates Do Not Exist for Model ( XY, XZ, YZ )a

Z:

1

2

X

Y:

1

2

1

2

1

0

)

)

)

2

)

)

)

0

aCells containing * may contain any positive numbers.

394

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

A value of Пұ ЕҪor yПұ. for a ML parameter estimate implies that ML fitted values equal 0 in some cells, and some odds ratio estimates equal Пұ or 0. One potential indicator is when the iterative fitting process does not converge, typically because an estimate keeps increasing from cycle to cycle. Most software, however, is fooled after a certain point in the iterative process by the nearly flat likelihood. It reports convergence, but because of the very slight curvature of the log likelihood, the estimated standard errors ЕҪbased on inverting the information matrix of second partial derivatives. are extremely large and numerically unstable. Slight changes in the data then often cause dramatic changes in the estimates and their standard errors. A danger with sparse data is that one might not realize that a true estimated effect is infinite and, as a consequence, report estimated effects and results of statistical inferences that are invalid and highly unstable.
Many ML analyses are unharmed by empty cells. Even when a parameter estimate is infinite, this is not fatal to data analysis. The likelihood-ratio confidence interval for the true log odds ratio has one endpoint that is finite.
For instance, when n11 s 0 but other ni j ) 0 in a 2 = 2 table, log вҗӘЛҶs yПұ
and a confidence interval has form ЕҪyПұ, U . for some finite upper bound U. When the pattern of empty cells forces certain fitted values for a model to equal 0, this affects the df for testing model fit ЕҪHaslett 1990..

9.8.3 Clinical Trials Example
Table 9.16 shows results of a clinical trial conducted at five centers. The purpose was to compare an active drug to placebo for treating fungal infections, with a binary ЕҪsuccess, failure. response. For these data, let Y s response, X s treatment ЕҪ x1 s 1 for active drug and x2 s 0 for placebo., and Z s center.
Centers 1 and 3 had no successes. Thus, the 5 = 2 marginal table relating response to center, collapsed over treatment, contains zero counts. The last two columns of Table 9.16 show this marginal table. Infinite ML estimates occur for terms in loglinear or logit models containing the YZ association. An example is the logit model
logit P ЕҪ Y s 1 < X s i , Z s k . s вҗӨ xi q вҗӨkZ.
ЕҪWe omit the intercept, so the Г„ вҗӨ Zk 4 need no constraint; then, these refer to center effects rather than contrasts between centers and a baseline center.. The likelihood function increases continually as вҗӨ1Z and вҗӨ3Z decrease toward yПұ; that is, as the logit decreases toward yПұ, so the fitted probability of success decreases toward the ML estimate of 0 for those centers.
The counts in the 2 = 2 marginal table relating response to treatment, shown in the bottom panel of Table 9.16, are all positive. The empty cells in Table 9.16 affect the center estimates, but not the treatment estimate, for this logit model. In the limit as the log likelihood increases, the fitted values
have a log odds ratio вҗӨЛҶs 1.55 ЕҪSE s 0.70.. Most software reports this, but

EMPTY CELLS AND SPARSENESS IN MODELING CONTINGENCY TABLES

395

TABLE 9.16 Clinical Trial Relating Treatment to Response with XY and YZ Marginal Tablesa

Response

YZ Marginal

Center

Treatment

Success

Failure

Success

Failure

1

Active drug

0

Placebo

0

5 0 14 9

2 Active drug 1 12 1 22

Placebo

0

10

3

Active drug

0

Placebo

0

7 0 12 5

4 Active drug 6 3 8 9

Placebo

2

6

5

Active drug

5

9 7 21

Placebo

2

12

XY

Active drug

12

36

marginal Placebo

4

42

aX, Treatment; Y, response; Z, center.

Source: Data courtesy of Diane Connell, Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation.

instead

of

вҗӨЛҶZ
1

s

вҗӨЛҶZ
3

s

yПұ

reports

large

numbers

with

extremely

large

stan-

dard errors. For instance, PROC GENMOD in SAS reports values of about

y26

for

вҗӨЛҶZ
1

and

вҗӨЛҶ3Z,

with

standard

errors

of

about

200,000.

The treatment estimate вҗӨЛҶs 1.55 also results from deleting centers 1 and 3

from the analysis. When a center contains responses of only one type, it provides no information about this odds ratio. ЕҪIt does provide information about the size of some other measures, such as the difference of proportions..

In fact, such tables also make no contribution to standard tests of conditional independence, such as the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel test ЕҪSection 6.3.2. and exact test ЕҪSection 6.7.5..

An alternative strategy in multicenter analyses combines centers of a

similar type. Then, if each resulting partial table has responses with both

outcomes, the inferences use all data. For Table 9.16, perhaps centers 1 and

3 are similar to center 2, since the success rate is very low for that center.

Combining these three centers and refitting the model to this table and the
tables for the other two centers yields вҗӨЛҶs 1.56 ЕҪSE s 0.70.. Usually, this

strategy produces results similar to deleting the table with no outcomes of a

particular type.

9.8.4 Effect of Small Samples on X 2 and G2
Although empty cells and sparse tables need not affect parameter estimates of interest, they can cause sampling distributions of goodness-of-fit statistics to be far from chi-squared. The true sampling distributions converge to

396

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

chi-squared as n в„ў Пұ, for a fixed number of cells N. The adequacy of the
chi-squared approximation depends both on n and N. Cochran studied the chi-squared approximation for X 2 in several articles.
In 1954, he suggested that to test independence with df ) 1, a minimum expected value вҗ®i f 1 is permissible as long as no more than about 20% of вҗ®i - 5. Koehler ЕҪ1986., Koehler and Larntz ЕҪ1980., and Larntz ЕҪ1978. showed that X 2 applies with smaller n and more sparse tables than G2. The distribution of G2 is usually poorly approximated by chi-squared when nrN is less than 5. Depending on the sparseness, P-values based on referring G2 to a chi-squared distribution can be too large or too small. When most вҗ®i are smaller than 0.5, treating G2 as chi-squared gives a highly conservative test;
when H0 is true, reported P-values tend to be much larger than true ones. When most вҗ®i are between 0.5 and 4, G2 tends to be too liberal; the reported P-value tends to be too small.
The size of nrN that produces adequate approximations for X 2 tends to decrease as N increases ЕҪKoehler and Larntz 1980.. However, the approxi-
mation tends to be poor for sparse tables containing both small and moderately large вҗ®i ЕҪHaberman 1988.. It is difficult to give a guideline that covers all cases. For other discussion, see Cressie and Read ЕҪ1989. and Lawal ЕҪ1984..
For fixed n and N, the chi-squared approximation is better for tests with smaller df. For instance, in testing conditional independence in I = J = K tables, G2wЕҪ XZ, YZ. < ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ.x ЕҪwith df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. is closer to chi-squared than G2ЕҪ XZ, YZ. wwith df s K ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.x. The ordinal test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 with the homogeneous linear-by-linear XY association model ЕҪ9.10. has df s 1, and behaves even better.

9.8.5 Model-Based Tests and Sparseness
From ЕҪ9.3. and ЕҪ9.4., the model-based statistics G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. and X 2ЕҪ M0 < M1. depend on the data only through the fitted values, and hence only through minimal sufficient statistics for the more complex model. These statistics have null distributions converging to chi-squared as the expected values of the minimal sufficient statistics grow. For most loglinear models, these sufficient statistics refer to marginal tables. Marginal totals are more nearly normally distributed than are single cell counts. Thus, G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. and X 2ЕҪ M0 < M1. converge to their limiting chi-squared distribution more quickly than does G2ЕҪ M0. and X 2ЕҪ M0., which depend also on individual cell counts.
When Г„вҗ®ЛҶi4 are small but the sufficient marginal totals for M1 are mostly in
at least the range 5 to 10, the chi-squared approximation is usually adequate for model comparison statistics. Haberman ЕҪ1977a. provided theoretical justification.

9.8.6 Alternative Asymptotics and Alternative Statistics
When large-sample approximations are inadequate, exact small-sample methods are an alternative. When they are infeasible, it is often possible to

EMPTY CELLS AND SPARSENESS IN MODELING CONTINGENCY TABLES

397

approximate exact distributions precisely using Monte Carlo methods ЕҪe.g., Booth and Butler 1999; Forster et al. 1996; Kim and Agresti 1997; Mehta et al. 1988..
An alternative approach uses sparse asymptotic approximations that apply when the number of cells N increases as n increases. For this approach, Г„вҗ®i4 need not increase, as they must do in the usual ЕҪfixed N, n в„ў Пұ. large-sam-
ple theory. For goodness-of-fit testing of a specified multinomial, Koehler and Larntz ЕҪ1980. showed that a standardized version of G2 has an approximate normal distribution for very sparse tables. Koehler ЕҪ1986. presented limiting normal distributions for G2 for use in testing models having direct ML estimates. McCullagh ЕҪ1986. reviewed ways of handling sparse tables and presented an alternative approximation for G2. Zelterman ЕҪ1987. gave normal approximations for X 2 and proposed an alternative statistic.

9.8.7 Adding Constants to Cells of a Contingency Table

Empty cells and sparse tables can cause problems with existence of estimates

for loglinear model parameters, estimation of odds ratios, performance of

computational algorithms, and asymptotic approximations of chi-squared

statistics. However, they need not be problematic. The likelihood can still be

maximized, a point estimate of Пұ for an effect still usually has a finite lower

bound for a likelihood-based confidence interval, and one can use small-sam-

ple inferential methods rather than asymptotic ones.

One way to obtain finite estimates of all effects and ensure convergence of

fitting algorithms is to add a small constant to cell counts. Some algorithms

add

1 2

to

each

cell,

as

Goodman

ЕҪ1964b, 1970, 1971a.

recommended

for

saturated models. An example of the beneficial effect of this for a saturated

model is bias reduction for estimating an odds ratio in a 2 = 2 table ЕҪGart

1966;

Gart

and

Zweiful

1967..

Adding

1 2

to

each

cell

before

fitting

an

unsaturated model smooths the data too much, however, causing havoc with

sampling distributions. This operation has too conservative an influence on

estimated effects and test statistics. The effect is very severe with a large

number of cells.

Even

for

a

saturated

model,

adding

1 2

to

each

cell

is

not

a

panacea

for

all

purposes. When the ordinary ML estimate of an odds ratio is infinite, the

estimate

after

adding

1 2

to

each

cell

is

finite,

as

are

the

endpoints

of

any

confidence interval. However, it is more sensible to use an upper bound of Пұ

for the odds ratio, since no sample evidence suggests that the odds ratio falls

below any given value.

When in doubt about the effect of sparse data, one should perform a

sensitivity analysis. For example, for each possibly influential observation,

delete it or move it to another cell to see how results vary with small perturbations to the data. Influence diagnostics for GLMs ЕҪWilliams 1987.

are also useful for this purpose. Often, some associations are not affected by

empty cells and give stable results for the various analyses, whereas others

398

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

that are affected are highly unstable. Use caution in making conclusions about an association if small changes in the data are influential.
Later chapters show ways to smooth data in a less ad hoc manner than adding arbitrary constants to cells. These include random effects models ЕҪSection 12.3. and Bayesian methods ЕҪSection 15.2..

NOTES

Section 9.1: Association Graphs and Collapsibility

9.1. Darroch et al. ЕҪ1980. defined a class of graphical models that contains the family of decomposable models ЕҪsee Note 8.2.. For expositions on graphical models and their relevant independence graphs, which show the conditional independence structure, see
also Anderson and BВЁockenholt ЕҪ2000., Edwards ЕҪ2000., Edwards and Kreiner ЕҪ1983.,
Kreiner ЕҪ1998., Lauritzen ЕҪ1996., and Whittaker ЕҪ1990.. Whittaker ЕҪ1990, Sec. 12.5. summarized connections with various definitions of collapsibility. 9.2 For I = J = 2 tables, the collapsibility conditions ЕҪSection 9.1.2. are necessary as well as sufficient ЕҪSimpson 1951; Whittemore 1978.. For I = J = K tables, Ducharme and Lepage ЕҪ1986. showed the conditions are necessary and sufficient for the odds ratios to remain the same no matter how the levels of Z are pooled ЕҪi.e., no matter how Z is partially collapsed..
Darroch ЕҪ1962. defined a perfect table as one for which for all i, j, k,

Гқ s вҗІ i jqвҗІ iqk вҗІqjq вҗІqqk ,
i вҗІ iqq

Гқ s вҗІqj kвҗІ i jq вҗІ iqqвҗІqqk ,
j вҗІqjq

Гқ s вҗІ iqk вҗІqj k вҗІ iqqвҗІqjq .
k вҗІqqk

For perfect tables, homogeneous association implies that
Г„ вҗІ i jk s вҗІ i jqвҗІ iqk вҗІqj krвҗІ iqqвҗІqjq вҗІqqk 4
and conditional odds ratios are identical to marginal odds ratios. Whittemore ЕҪ1978. used perfect tables to illustrate that for I = J = K tables with K ) 2, conditional and marginal odds ratios can be identical even when no pair of variables is conditionally independent. See also Davis ЕҪ1986b..
Suppose that the difference of proportions or relative risk, computed for a binary response Y and predictor X, is the same at every level of Z. If Z is independent of X in the marginal XZ table or if Z is conditionally independent of Y given X, the measure has the same value in the marginal XY table ЕҪShapiro 1982.. Thus, for factorial designs with the same number of observations at each combination of levels, the difference of proportions and relative risk are collapsible. See also Wermuth ЕҪ1987..

Section 9.2: Model Selection and Comparison
9.3. Articles on loglinear model selection include Aitkin ЕҪ1979, 1980., Benedetti and Brown ЕҪ1978., Brown ЕҪ1976., Goodman ЕҪ1970, 1971a., Wermuth ЕҪ1976., and Whittaker and Aitkin ЕҪ1978.. When a certain model holds, G2rdf has an asymptotic mean of 1. Goodman ЕҪ1971a. recommended this index for comparing fits. Smaller values represent better fits.

NOTES

399

9.4. Kullback et al. ЕҪ1962. and Lancaster ЕҪ1951. were among the first to partition chi-squared statistics in multiway tables. Goodman ЕҪ1970. and Plackett ЕҪ1962. noted difficulties with their approaches. When observations have distribution in the natural exponential
family, Simon ЕҪ1973. showed G2ЕҪ M0 < M1. s 2Гқi вҗ®ЛҶ1i logЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ1irвҗ®ЛҶ0 i. whenever models are
linear in the natural parameters. See Lang ЕҪ1996b. for partitionings for more complex models.

Section 9.4: Modeling Ordinal Associations
9.5. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. stimulated research on loglinear models for ordinal data. His work extended Haberman ЕҪ1974b., who expressed the вҗӯX Y association term with an expansion in orthogonal polynomials. For more general ordinal models for multiway tables, see Agresti ЕҪ1984., Becker ЕҪ1989a., Becker and Clogg ЕҪ1989., and Goodman ЕҪ1986..

Section 9.6: Association Models, Correlation Models, and Correspondence Analysis
9.6. Early articles on the RC model include Goodman ЕҪ1979a, 1981a, b. and Andersen ЕҪ1980, pp. 210бҺҗ216., apparently partly motivated by earlier work of G. Rasch ЕҪsee
Andersen 1995.. Anderson and BВЁockenholt ЕҪ2000., Becker ЕҪ1989a, b, 1990., Becker and
Clogg ЕҪ1989., Chuang et al. ЕҪ1985., and Goodman ЕҪ1985, 1986, 1996. discussed generalizations for multiway tables. Anderson ЕҪ1984. discussed a related model. Anderson and Vermunt ЕҪ2000. showed that RC and related association models arise when observed variables are conditionally independent given a latent variable that is conditionally normal, given the observed variables. Their work generalizes results in Lauritzen and Wermuth ЕҪ1989. and discussion by Whittaker of van der Heijden et al. ЕҪ1989.. See also de Falguerolles et al. ЕҪ1995.. Clogg and Shihadeh ЕҪ1994. surveyed association models and related correlation models. 9.7. Kendall and Stuart ЕҪ1979, Chap. 33. surveyed basic canonical correlation methods for contingency tables. See also Williams ЕҪ1952., who discussed earlier work by R. A. Fisher and others. Karl Pearson often analyzed tables by assuming an underlying bivariate normal distribution ЕҪSection 16.1.. For estimating that distributionвҖҷs correlation, see Becker ЕҪ1989b., Goodman ЕҪ1981b., Kendall and Stuart ЕҪ1979, Chaps. 26 and 33., Lancaster ЕҪ1969, Chap. X., the Pearson ЕҪ1904. tetrachoric correlation for 2 = 2 tables, and the Lancaster and Hamdan ЕҪ1964. polychoric correlation for I = J tables.
9.8. Correspondence analysis gained popularity in France under the influence of BenzВҙecri
ЕҪsee, e.g., 1973.. Goodman ЕҪ1996. attributed its origins to H. O. Hartley, publishing under his original German name ЕҪHirschfeld, 1935.. Greenacre ЕҪ1993. related it to the singular value decomposition of a matrix. For other discussion, see Escoufier ЕҪ1982., Friendly ЕҪ2000, Chap. 5., Goodman ЕҪ1986, 1996, 2000., Michailidis and de Leeuw ЕҪ1998., van der Heijden and de Leeuw ЕҪ1985., and van der Heijden et al. ЕҪ1989.. Gabriel ЕҪ1971. discussed related work on biplots.

Section 9.7: Poisson Regression for Rates
9.9. Another application using offsets is table standardization ЕҪSection 8.7.4.. For analyses of rate data, see Breslow and Day ЕҪ1987, Sec. 4.5., Freeman and Holford ЕҪ1980., Frome ЕҪ1983., and Hoem ЕҪ1987.. Articles dealing with grouped survival data, particularly loglinear and logit models for survival probabilities, include Aranda-Ordaz ЕҪ1983., Larson ЕҪ1984., Prentice and Gloeckler ЕҪ1978., Schluchter and Jackson ЕҪ1989., Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000, Chap. 17., and Thompson ЕҪ1977.. Aitkin and Clayton ЕҪ1980. discussed exponential survival models and also presented similar models having hazard functions

400

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

9.10.

for Weibull or extreme-value survival distributions. Log likelihood ЕҪ9.19. actually
applies only for noninformatiВ®e censoring mechanisms. It does not make sense if
subjects tend to withdraw from the study because of factors related to it, perhaps
because of health effects related to one of the treatments. Lindsey and Mersch ЕҪ1992. showed a clever way to use loglinear models to fit exponential family distributions f ЕҪ y;вҗӘ . of form ЕҪ4.14. with вҗҫ known. One breaks the response scale into intervals Г„ЕҪ yk y вҢ¬ kr2, yk q вҢ¬ kr2.4. Counts in those intervals follow a multinomial with probabilities approximated by Г„ f ЕҪ yk , вҗӘ .вҢ¬ k4. The log expected count approximations are linear in вҗӘ with an offset.

PROBLEMS
Applications
9.1 Use odds ratios in Table 8.3 to illustrate the collapsibility conditions. a. For ЕҪ A, C, M ., all conditional odds ratios equal 1.0. Explain why all reported marginal odds ratios equal 1.0. b. For ЕҪ AC, M ., explain why ЕҪi. all conditional odds ratios are the
same as the marginal odds ratios, and ЕҪii. all вҗ®ЛҶacqs nacq.
c. For ЕҪ AM, CM ., explain why ЕҪi. the AC conditional odds ratios of 1.0 need not be the same as the AC marginal odds ratio, ЕҪii. the AM and CM conditional odds ratios are the same as the marginal
odds ratios, and ЕҪiii. all вҗ®ЛҶaqm s naqm and вҗ®ЛҶqc m s nqc m.
d. For ЕҪ AC, AM, CM ., explain why ЕҪi. no conditional odds ratios need be the same as the related marginal odds ratios, and ЕҪii. the fitted marginal odds ratios must equal the sample marginal odds ratios.
9.2 Table 9.17 summarizes a study with variables age of mother ЕҪ A., length of gestation ЕҪG. in days, infant survival ЕҪ I ., and number of cigarettes smoked per day during the prenatal period ЕҪS.. Treat G and I as response variables and A and S as explanatory. a. Explain why a loglinear model should include the вҗӯ AS term. b. Fit the models ЕҪ AGIS., ЕҪ AGI, AIS, AGS, GIS., ЕҪ AG, AI, AS, GI, GS, IS., and ЕҪ AS, G, I .. Identify a subset of models nested between two of these that may fit well. Select one such model. c. Use ЕҪi. forward selection, and ЕҪii. backward elimination to build a model. Compare the results of the strategies, and interpret the models chosen.
9.3 Refer to Table 2.13. Consider the nested set Г„ЕҪ DVP., ЕҪ DP, VP, DV ., ЕҪVP, DV ., ЕҪ P, DV ., ЕҪ D, V, P.4. Partition chi-squared to compare the four pairs, ensuring that the overall type I error probability for the four comparisons does not exceed вҗЈ s 0.10. Which model would you select, using a backward comparison starting with ЕҪ DVP.? Show that the final

PROBLEMS

401

TABLE 9.17 Data for Problem 9.2

Infant Survival

Age

Smoking

Gestation

No

Yes

- 30

-5

F 260 ) 260

50

315

24

4012

5q

F 260

9

40

) 260

6

459

30 q

-5

F 260 ) 260

41

147

14

1594

5q

F 260

4

11

) 260

1

124

Source: N. Wermuth, pp. 279бҺҗ295 in Proc. 9th International Biometrics Conference, Vol. 1 ЕҪ1976.. Reprinted with permission from the Biometric Society.

model selected depends on the choice of nested set, by repeating the analysis with ЕҪ DP, VP, DV ., ЕҪ DP, DV ., ЕҪ P, DV ., ЕҪ D, V, P..
9.4 Consider the loglinear model selection for Table 6.3. a. Why is it not sensible to consider models omitting the вҗӯG M term? b. Using forward selection starting with ЕҪGM, E, P., show that model ЕҪGM, GP, EG, EMP. seems reasonable. c. Using backward elimination, show that ЕҪGM, GP, EMP. or ЕҪGM, GP, EG, EMP. seems reasonable. d. The EMP interaction seems vital. To describe it, show that the effect of extramarital sex on divorce is greater for subjects who had no premarital sex. e. Use residuals to describe the lack of fit of model ЕҪGM, EMP..
9.5 For model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . with Table 8.3, the standardized Pearson residual in each cell equals "0.63. Interpret, and explain why each one has the same absolute value. By contrast, model ЕҪ AM, CM . has standardized Pearson residual "3.70 in each cell where M s yes ЕҪe.g., q3.70 when A s C s yes. and "12.80 in each cell where M s no ЕҪe.g., q12.80 when A s C s yes.. Interpret.
9.6 Refer to Table 8.8. Conduct a residual analysis with the model of no three-factor interaction to describe the nature of the interaction.
9.7 Perform a residual analysis for the independence model with Table 3.2. Explain why it suggests that the linear-by-linear association model may fit better. Fit it, compare to the independence model, and interpret.

402

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

9.8 Refer to Problem 9.7.
a. Using standardized scores, find вҗӨЛҶ. Comment on the strength of
association. b. Fit a model in which job satisfaction scores are parameters. Inter-
pret the estimated scores, and compare the fit to the L = L model.
9.9 Refer to Table 9.3. a. For the linear-by-linear association model, construct a 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio using the four corner cells. Interpret. b. Fit the column effects model. Compare estimated column scores to the equal-interval scores in part ЕҪa.. Test that the true column scores are equal-interval, given that the model holds. Interpret. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio using the four corner cells. Compare to part ЕҪa..
9.10 A weak local association may be substantively important for nonlocal categories. Illustrate with the L = L model for Table 9.9, showing how the estimated odd ratio for the four corner cells compares to the estimated local odds ratio.
9.11 Refer to Table 7.8. Fit the homogeneous linear-by-linear association model, and interpret. Test conditional independence between income ЕҪ I . and job satisfaction ЕҪS., controlling for gender ЕҪG., using ЕҪa. that model, and ЕҪb. model ЕҪ IS, IG, SG.. Explain why the results are so different.
9.12 Fit the RC model to Table 9.3. Interpret the estimated scores. Does it fit better than the uniform association model?
9.13 Replicate the results in Section 9.6 for the correlation and correspondence models with Table 9.9.
9.14 One hundred leukemia patients were randomly assigned to two treatments. During the study, 10 subjects on treatment A died and 18 subjects on treatment B died. The total time at risk was 170.4 years for treatment A and 147.3 years for treatment B. Test whether the two treatments have the same death rates. Compare the rates with a confidence interval.
9.15 For Table 9.11, fit a model in which death rate depends only on age. Interpret the age effect.
9.16 Consider model ЕҪ9.18.. What is the effect on the model parameter estimates, their standard errors, and the goodness-of-fit statistics when ЕҪa. the times at risk are doubled, but the numbers of deaths stay the

PROBLEMS

403

same; ЕҪb. the times at risk stay the same, but the numbers of deaths double; and ЕҪc. the times at risk and the numbers of deaths both double.

9.17 Consider Table 9.13. Explain how one could analyze whether the hazard depends on time.
9.18 An article by W. A. Ray et al. ЕҪ Amer. J. Epidemiol. 132: 873бҺҗ884, 1992. dealt with motor vehicle accident rates for 16,262 subjects aged 65бҺҗ84 years, with data on each for up to 4 years. In 17.3 thousand years of observation, the women had 175 accidents in which an injury occurred. In 21.4 thousand years, men had 320 injurious accidents. a. Find a 95% confidence interval for the true overall rate of injurious accidents. b. Using a model, compare the rates for men and women.
9.19 A table at the textвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html. shows the number of train miles ЕҪin millions. and the number of collisions involving British Rail passenger trains between 1970 and 1984. A Poisson model assuming a constant log rate вҗЈ over the 14-year
period has вҗЈЛҶ s y4.177 ЕҪSE s 0.1325. and X 2 s 14.8 ЕҪdf s 13..
Interpret.
9.20 Table 9.18 lists total attendance ЕҪin thousands. and the total number of arrests in the 1987бҺҗ1988 season for soccer teams in the Second Division of the British football league. Let Y s number of arrests for a team, and let t s total attendance. Explain why the model EЕҪY . s вҗ®t

TABLE 9.18 Data for Problem 9.20

Team

Attendance ЕҪthousands.

Arrests

Team

Attendance ЕҪthousands.

Arrests

Aston Villa

404

308 Shrewsbury

108

68

Bradford City

286

197 Swindon Town

210

67

Leeds United

443

184 Sheffield Utd.

224

60

Bournemouth

169

149 Stoke City

211

57

West Brom

222

132 Barnsley

168

55

Hudderfield

150

126 Millwall

185

44

Middlesbro

321

110 Hull City

158

38

Birmingham

189

101 Manchester City

429

35

Ipswich Town

258

99 Plymouth

226

29

Leicester City

223

81 Reading

150

20

Blackburn

211

79 Oldham

148

19

Crystal Palace

215

78

Source: The Independent ЕҪLondon., Dec. 21, 1988. Thanks to P. M. E. Altham for showing me these data.

404

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

might be plausible. Assuming Poisson sampling, fit it and interpret. Plot arrests against attendance, and overlay the prediction equation. Use residuals to identify teams that had arrest counts much different than expected.

TABLE 9.19 Data for Problem 9.21

Person-Years

Coronary Deaths

Age

Nonsmokers

Smokers

Nonsmokers

Smokers

35бҺҗ44

18,793

52,407

2

32

45бҺҗ54

10,673

43,248

12

104

55бҺҗ64

5710

28,612

28

206

65бҺҗ74

2585

12,663

28

186

75бҺҗ84

1462

5317

31

102

Source: R. Doll and A. B. Hill, Natl. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 19: 205бҺҗ268 ЕҪ1966.. See also N. R. Breslow in A Celebration of Statistics, ed. A. C. Atkinson and S. E. Fienberg, ЕҪNew York: Springer-Verlag, 1985..

9.21 Table 9.19 is based on a study with British doctors. a. For each age, find the sample coronary death rates per 1000 person-years for nonsmokers and smokers. To compare them, take their ratio and describe its dependence on age. b. Fit a main-effects model for the log rates having four parameters for age and one for smoking. In discussing lack of fit, show that this model assumes a constant ratio of nonsmokersвҖҷ to smokersвҖҷ coronary death rates over age. c. From part ЕҪa., explain why it is sensible to add a quantitative interaction of age and smoking. For this model, show that the log ratio of coronary death rates changes linearly with age. Assign scores to age, fit the model, and interpret.
9.22 Analyze Table 9.9 using ordinal logit models. Interpret, and discuss advantagesrdisadvantages compared to loglinear analyses.
9.23 Refer to Problem 8.6. Analyze these data, using methods of this chapter.
Theory and Methods
9.24 In a 2 = 2 = K table, the true XY conditional odds ratios are identical, but different from the XY marginal odds ratio. Is there three-factor interaction? Is Z conditionally independent of X or Y ? Explain.

PROBLEMS

405

9.25 Consider loglinear model ЕҪWX, XY, YZ.. Explain why W and Z are independent given X alone or given Y alone or given both X and Y. When are W and Y conditionally independent? When are X and Z conditionally independent?

9.26 Suppose that loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ. holds.
a. Find вҗ®i jq and log вҗ®i jq. Show the loglinear model for the XY marginal table has the same association parameters as Г„вҗӯX Y i j 4 in ЕҪ XY, XZ.. Deduce that odds ratios are the same in the XY marginal
table as in the partial tables. Using an analogous result for model ЕҪ XY, YZ., deduce the collapsibility conditions in Section 9.1.2. b. Calculate log вҗ®i jq for model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., and explain why marginal associations need not equal conditional associations.

9.27 For a four-way table, is the WX conditional association the same as the WX marginal association for the loglinear model ЕҪa. ЕҪWX, XYZ.? and ЕҪb. ЕҪWX, WZ, XY, YZ.? Why?

9.28 Loglinear model M0 is a special case of loglinear model M1. a. Explain why the fitted values for the two models are identical in the sufficient marginal distributions for M0.
b. Haberman ЕҪ1974a. showed that when Г„вҗ®ЛҶi4 satisfy any model that is a special case of M0 , Гқi вҗ®ЛҶ1i log вҗ®ЛҶi s Гқi вҗ®ЛҶ0i log вҗ®ЛҶi. Thus, вҗ®ЛҶ 0 is the orthogonal projection of вҗ®ЛҶ 1 onto the linear manifold of Г„log вҗ®4
satisfying M0. Using this, show that G2ЕҪ M0 . y G2ЕҪ M1. s
2Гқi вҗ®ЛҶ1i logЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ1irвҗ®ЛҶ0 i..
9.29 Refer to Section 9.2.4. Show that G2ЕҪ Mj < Mjy1 . equals G2 for independence in the 2 = 2 table comparing columns 1 through j y 1 with column j.

9.30 For T categorical variables X1, . . . , XT , explain why: a. G2ЕҪ X1, X2 , . . . , XT . s G2ЕҪ X1, X2 . q G2ЕҪ X1 X2 , X3. q РёРёРё qG2ЕҪ X1 X2 РёРёРё XTy1 , XT .. b. G2 ЕҪ X1 РёРёРё XTy1 , XT . s G2 ЕҪ X1, XT . q G2 ЕҪ X1 XT , X1 X2 . q РёРёРё qG2 ЕҪ X1 X2 РёРёРё XTy1 , X1 X2 РёРёРё XTy2 XT ..
9.31 For I = 2 contingency tables, explain why the linear-by-linear association model is equivalent to the linear logit model ЕҪ5.5..
9.32 Consider the L = L model ЕҪ9.6. with Г„В®j s j4 replaced by Г„В®j s 2 j4.
Explain why вҗӨЛҶ is halved but Г„ вҗ®ЛҶi j4, Г„вҗӘЛҶi j4, and G2 are unchanged.

406

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

9.33 Lehmann ЕҪ1966. defined ЕҪ X, Y . to be positiВ®ely likelihood-ratio dependent if their joint density satisfies f ЕҪ x1, y1. f ЕҪ x2 , y2 . G f ЕҪ x1, y2 . f ЕҪ x2 , y1. whenever x1 - x2 and y1 - y2. Then, the conditional distribution of Y ЕҪ X . stochastically increases as X ЕҪY . increases ЕҪGoodman 1981a..
a. For the L = L model, show that the conditional distributions of Y and of X are stochastically ordered. What is its nature if вҗӨ ) 0?
b. In row effects model ЕҪ9.8., if вҗ®i ) вҗ®h, show that the conditional distribution of Y is stochastically higher in row i than in row h. Explain why вҗ®1 s РёРёРё s вҗ®I is equivalent to the equality of the I conditional distributions within rows.

9.34 Yule ЕҪ1906. defined a table to be isotropic if an ordering of rows and of columns exists such that the local log odds ratios are all nonnegative wsee also Goodman ЕҪ1981a.x. a. Show that a table is isotropic if it satisfies ЕҪi. the linear-by-linear association model, ЕҪii. the row effects model, and ЕҪiii. the RC model.
b. Explain why a table that is isotropic for a certain ordering is still isotropic when adjacent rows or columns are combined.

9.35 Consider the log likelihood for the linear-by-linear association model. a. Differentiating with respect to вҗӨ and evaluating at вҗӨ s 0 and null estimates of parameters, show that the score function is proportional to
Гқ Гқ uiВ®j ЕҪ pi j y piqpqj . .
ij

b. Use the delta method to show that its null SE is
ВҪ Гқ ui2 piqyЕҪ Гқ ui piq .2 Гқ В®j2 pqj y ЕҪ Гқ В®j pqj .2

5 1r2
n.

c. Construct a score statistic for testing independence. Show that it is essentially the correlation test ЕҪ3.15.. wHirotsu ЕҪ1982. discussed a family of score tests for ordered alternatives.x
9.36 Given the parenthetical result in Problem 7.33, show that if cumulative logit model ЕҪ7.24. holds and <вҗӨ< is small, the linear-by-linear association model should fit well with row scores Г„ xi4 and вҖҳвҖҳriditвҖҷвҖҷ column scores Г„В®j s w PЕҪY F j y 1. q PЕҪY F j.xr24, with its вҗӨ parameter about twice вҗӨ for model ЕҪ7.24..

PROBLEMS

407

9.37 Consider the row effects model ЕҪ9.8.. a. Show that no loss of generality occurs in letting вҗӯIX s вҗӯJY s вҗ®I s 0. b. Show that minimal sufficient statistics are Г„ niq4, Г„ nqj4, and Г„ГқjВ®j ni j, i s 1, . . . , I4, and derive the likelihood equations.

9.38 Show that the column effects model corresponds to a baseline-category logit model for Y that is linear in scores for X, with slope depending on the paired response categories.

9.39 Refer to the homogeneous linear-by-linear association model ЕҪ9.10.. a. Show that the likelihood equations are, for all i, j, and k,

вҗ®ЛҶiqk s niqk ,

вҗ®ЛҶqj k s nqj k ,

Гқ Гқ uiВ®j вҗ®ЛҶi jqs Гқ Гқ uiВ®j ni jq.

ij

ij

b. Show that residual df s K ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. y 1. c. When I s J s 2, explain why it is equivalent to ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ..
d. Show how the last likelihood equation above changes for heterogeneous linear-by-linear XY association ЕҪ9.11.. Explain why, in each stratum, the fitted XY correlation equals the sample correlation.

9.40 When model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. is inadequate and variables are ordinal, useful models are nested between it and ЕҪ XYZ.. For ordered scores Г„ui4, Г„ В®j4, and Г„wk4, consider

log

вҗ®i jk

s

вҗӯ

q

вҗӯ

X i

q вҗӯjY

q вҗӯkZ

q вҗӯi jX Y

q вҗӯi kX Z

q вҗӯjkY Z

q вҗӨ uiВ®jwk .

ЕҪ 9 .22.

a. Define вҗӘi jk s вҗӘi jЕҪ kq1. rвҗӘi jЕҪ k. s вҗӘiЕҪ jq1. krвҗӘiЕҪ j.k s вҗӘЕҪiq1. jkrвҗӘЕҪi. jk . For unit-spaced scores, show that log вҗӘi jk s вҗӨ. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. called this the uniform interaction model.
b. Show that log odds ratios for any two variables change linearly across levels of the third variable.
c. Show that the likelihood equations are those for model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ. plus

Гқ Гқ Гқ uiВ®jwk вҗ®ЛҶi jk s Гқ Гқ Гқ uiВ®jwk ni jk .

i jk

i jk

d. Explain why model ЕҪ9.12. is a special case of model ЕҪ9.22..

9.41 Construct a model having general XZ and YZ associations, but row effects for the XY association that are ЕҪa. homogeneous, and ЕҪb. heterogeneous across levels of Z. Interpret.

408

BUILDING AND EXTENDING LOGLINEAR r LOGIT MODELS

9.42 Explain why the RC model requires scale constraints for the scores. Show the residual df s ЕҪ I y 2.ЕҪ J y 2.. Find and interpret the likelihood equations. Explain why the fit is invariant to category orderings.
9.43 Refer to correlation model ЕҪ9.16. ЕҪGoodman 1985, 1986.. a. Show that вҗӯ is the correlation between the scores. b. If this model holds, show that Гқi вҗ®iЕҪвҗІ i jrвҗІqj. s вҗӯвҗҜj and ГқjвҗҜjЕҪвҗІ i jrвҗІiq. s вҗӯвҗ®i. Interpret. c. With вҗӯ close to zero, show that logЕҪвҗІi j. has form вҗҘi q вҗҰi q вҗӯвҗ®iвҗҜj q oЕҪ вҗӯ., where oЕҪ вҗӯ.rвҗӯ в„ў 0 as вҗӯ в„ў 0. Thus, when the association is weak, the correlation model is similar to the linear-by-linear association model with вҗӨ s вҗӯ and scores Г„ui s вҗ®i4 and Г„ В®j s вҗҜj4.
9.44 For the general canonical correlation model, show that Гқвҗӯ2k s ГқiГқjЕҪвҗІ i j y вҗІ iqвҗІqj .2rвҗІiqвҗІqj. Thus, the squared correlations partition a dependence measure that is the noncentrality ЕҪ6.8. of X 2 for the independence model with n s 1. wGoodman ЕҪ1986. stated other partitionings.x
9.45 Refer to model ЕҪ9.18.. Given the times at risk Г„ti j4, show that sufficient statistics are Г„ niq4 and Г„ nqj4.
9.46 Refer to Section 9.7.3. Let T s Гқti and W s Гқwi. Suppose that survival times have a negative exponential distribution with parameter вҗӯ.
a. Using log likelihood ЕҪ9.19., show that вҗӯЛҶ s WrT.
b. Conditional on T, show that W has a Poisson distribution with
mean Tвҗӯ. Using the Poisson likelihood, show that вҗӯЛҶ s WrT.

9.47 Show that ML estimates do not exist for Table 9.15. w Hint: Haberman
ЕҪ1973b, 1974a, p. 398.: If вҗ®ЛҶ111 s c ) 0, then marginal constraints the model satisfy imply that вҗ®ЛҶ222 s yc.x
9.48 For a loglinear model, explain heuristically why the ML estimate of a parameter is infinite when its sufficient statistic takes its maximum or minimum possible value, for given values of other sufficient statistics.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 10
Models for Matched Pairs

We next introduce methods for comparing categorical responses for two samples when each observation in one sample pairs with an observation in the other. Such matched-pairs data commonly occur in studies with repeated measurement of subjects, such as longitudinal studies that observe subjects over time. Because of the matching, the responses in the two samples are statistically dependent. This is the first of four chapters on special methods for handling such dependence.
Table 10.1 illustrates matched-pairs data. For a poll of a random sample of 1600 voting-age British citizens, 944 indicated approval of the Prime MinisterвҖҷs performance in office. Six months later, of these same 1600 people, 880 indicated approval. The two cells with identical row and column response form the main diagonal of the table. These subjects had the same opinion at both surveys. They compose most of the sample, since relatively few people changed opinion. A strong association exists between opinions six months apart, the sample odds ratio being ЕҪ794 = 570.rЕҪ150 = 86. s 35.1.
For matched pairs with a categorical response, a two-way contingency table with the same row and column categories summarizes the data. The table is square. In this chapter we present analyses of square tables. In Section 10.1 we describe methods for comparing proportions with a binary response. In Section 10.2 we discuss logistic regression analyses of such data. For multicategory responses, Section 10.3 covers nominal and ordinal logit

TABLE 10.1
First Survey
Approve Disapprove
Total

Rating of Performance of Prime Minister

Second Survey

Approve

Disapprove

794

150

86

570

880

720

Total
944 656 1600

409

410

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

models for comparing the response distributions. In Section 10.4 we introduce loglinear models for square tables. In Sections 10.5 and 10.6 we discuss two matched-pairs applications for which models for square tables are useful: analyzing agreement between two observers who rate a common set of subjects, and evaluating preferences of treatments based on their pairwise evaluation.
Section 10.7 extends the models of Sections 10.2 through 10.4 to multiway tables that result from matched sets of observations. In Chapter 11 we extend them further to incorporate explanatory variables.

10.1 COMPARING DEPENDENT PROPORTIONS
For each of n matched pairs, let вҗІab denote the probability of outcome a for the first observation and outcome b for the second. Let nab count the number of such pairs, with pab s nabrn the sample proportion. We treat Г„ nab4 as a sample from a multinomial ЕҪ n; Г„вҗІab4. distribution. Then paq is the proportion in category a for observation 1, and pqa is the corresponding proportion for observation 2. We compare samples by comparing marginal proportions Г„ paq4 with Г„ pqa4. With matched samples, these proportions are correlated, and methods for independent samples are inappropriate.
In this section we consider binary outcomes. When вҗІ 1qs вҗІq1, then вҗІ 2qs вҗІq2 also, and there is marginal homogeneity. Since
вҗІ 1qy вҗІq1 s ЕҪ вҗІ 11 q вҗІ 12 . y ЕҪ вҗІ 11 q вҗІ 21 . s вҗІ 12 y вҗІ 21 ,
marginal homogeneity in 2 = 2 tables is equivalent to вҗІ 12 s вҗІ 21. The table then shows symmetry across the main diagonal.
10.1.1 Inference for Dependent Proportions
One comparison of the marginal distributions uses вҗҰ s вҗІq1 y вҗІ 1q. Let
d s pq1 y p1qs p2qy pq2 .
From formula ЕҪ1.3. for multinomial covariances, covЕҪ pq1, p1q. s covЕҪ p11 q p21, p11 q p12 . simplifies to ЕҪвҗІ 11вҗІ 22 y вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 .rn. Thus,
varЕҪ'n d . s вҗІ 1q ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1q . q вҗІq1ЕҪ1 y вҗІq1 . y 2ЕҪвҗІ 11вҗІ 22 y вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 . .
ЕҪ 10 .1.
For large samples, d has approximately a normal sampling distribution. A confidence interval for вҗҰ s вҗІq1 y вҗІ 1q is then
d " zвҗЈr2 вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪ d. ,

COMPARING DEPENDENT PROPORTIONS

411

where

вҗҙЛҶ 2 ЕҪ d . s p1q ЕҪ1 y p1q . q pq1ЕҪ 1 y pq1 . y 2ЕҪ p11 p22 y p12 p21 . rn

s ЕҪ p12 q p21 . y ЕҪ p12 y p21 . 2 rn,

ЕҪ 10 .2.

with the second formula following after substitution and some algebra.
Inverting the score test of H0: вҗҰ s вҗҰ0 is more complex but provides coverage probabilities closer to the nominal values ЕҪTango 1998., as does adding 1 to
each cell before computing d and вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪ d..
The hypothesis of marginal homogeneity is H0: вҗІ 1qs вҗІq1 ЕҪi.e., вҗҰ s 0..
The ratio z s drвҗҙЛҶ ЕҪ d. or its square is a Wald test statistic. Under H0, an
alternative estimated variance is

вҗҙЛҶ02 ЕҪ d . s s 2 p12 . q p21 n12 q n21

n

n

ЕҪ 10 .3.

The score test statistic z0 s drвҗҙЛҶ0ЕҪ d. simplifies to

n21 y n12
z0 s ЕҪ n21 q n12 . 1r2 .

ЕҪ 10 .4.

The square of z0 is a chi-squared statistic with df s 1. The test using it is called McNemarвҖҷs test ЕҪMcNemar 1947..
The McNemar statistic depends only on cases classified in different categories for the two observations. The n11 q n22 on the main diagonal are irrelevant to inference about whether вҗІ 1q and вҗІq1 differ. This may seem surprising, but all cases contribute to inference about how much вҗІ 1q and вҗІq1 differ: for instance, to estimating вҗҰ and the standard error.

10.1.2 Prime Minister Approval Rating Example
For Table 10.1, the sample proportions of approval of the prime ministerвҖҷs performance are p1qs 944r1600 s 0.59 for the first survey and pq1 s 880r1600 s 0.55 for the second. Using ЕҪ10.2., a 95% confidence interval for вҗІq1 y вҗІ 1q is ЕҪ0.55 y 0.59. " 1.96ЕҪ0.0095., or ЕҪy0.06, y0.02.. The approval rating appears to have dropped between 2 and 6%.
For testing marginal homogeneity, the test statistic ЕҪ10.4. using the null variance is
86 y 150
z0 s ЕҪ86 q 150. 1r2 s y4.17.
It shows strong evidence of a drop in the approval rating.

412

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

10.1.3 Increased Precision with Dependent Samples

The final term of formula ЕҪ10.1., based on covЕҪ pq1, p1q., reflects the dependence between the marginal proportions. By contrast, for independent samples of size n each to estimate binomial probabilities вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 , the covariance for the sample proportions is zero, and
var 'n ЕҪdifference of sample proportions. s вҗІ 1ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 1 . q вҗІ 2 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 . .

Dependent samples usually exhibit a positive dependence, with log вҗӘ s logwвҗІ 11вҗІ 22rвҗІ 12вҗІ 21 x ) 0; that is, вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 ) вҗІ 12вҗІ 21. From ЕҪ10.1., positive dependence implies that varЕҪ d. is smaller than when the samples are independent.
A study design using dependent samples can help improve the precision of statistical inferences for within-subject effects. ЕҪBy contrast, standard errors tend to be larger, per given number of observations, for between-subject group comparisons.. The improvement is substantial when samples are highly correlated. To illustrate, Table 10.1 with dependent samples of size 1600 each has a standard error of 0.0095 for d s 0.55 y 0.59. The two observations have strong association, the sample odds ratio being 35.1. Independent
samples of size 1600 each with вҗІЛҶ 1 y вҗІЛҶ 2 s 0.55 y 0.59 have a standard error
of 0.0175 for the difference, nearly twice as large.

10.1.4 Small-Sample Test Comparing Matched Proportions

The null hypothesis of marginal homogeneity for binary matched pairs is,

equivalently, H0: вҗІ 12 s вҗІ 21 or вҗІ 21rЕҪвҗІ 21 q вҗІ 12 . s 0.5. For small samples,

an exact test conditions on n* s n21 q n12 ЕҪMosteller 1952.. Under H0 , n21

has

a

binomial

ЕҪ n*,

1.
2

distribution,

for

which

EЕҪ n21 . s

21 n*.

The

P-value

for

the test is a binomial tail probability.

For instance, for Table 10.1, consider Ha: вҗІq1 - вҗІ 1q, or equivalently, Ha: вҗІ 21 - вҗІ 12 . Since n* s 86 q 150 s 236, the reference distribution is binЕҪ236, 12 .. The P-value is the probability of at least 150 successes out of 236

trials, which equals 0.00002. The P-value for Ha: вҗІq1 / вҗІ 1q doubles this.

When n* ) 10, the reference binomial distribution is approximately nor-

mal

with

mean

21 n*

and

variance

n*ЕҪ

1 2

.ЕҪ

1 2

..

The

standardized

normal

test

statistic equals

n21 y 21 n*

n21 y n12

n* z s ЕҪ 21 . ЕҪ 21 . 1r2 s ЕҪ n21 q n12 . 1r2 .

This is identical to the McNemar statistic ЕҪ10.4..

COMPARING DEPENDENT PROPORTIONS

413

10.1.5 Connection between McNemar and CochranвҖ“MantelвҖ“Haenszel Tests
An alternative representation of binary responses for n matched pairs presents the data in n partial tables, one 2 = 2 table for each pair. It has columns that are the two possible outcomes for each measurement. Row 1 shows the outcome of the first observation, and row 2 shows the outcome of the second.
Table 10.2 shows the four possible partial tables in this representation. For Table 10.1, the full three-way table has 1600 partial tables; 794 look like the one for subject 1 ЕҪi.e., вҖҳвҖҳapproveвҖҷвҖҷ at both surveys., 570 who disapproved at each survey have tables like the one for subject 2, 86 have tables like the one for subject 3, and 150 have tables like the one for subject 4. The 1600 subjects from Table 10.1 provide 3200 observations in a 2 = 2 = 1600 contingency table. Collapsing this table over the 1600 partial tables yields a 2 = 2 table with first row equal to ЕҪ944, 656. and second row equal to ЕҪ880, 720.. These are the total number of ЕҪapprove, disapprove. responses for the two surveys. They form the marginal counts in Table 10.1.
For each subject, suppose that the probability of approval is identical in each survey. Then, conditional independence exists between the opinion outcome and the survey time, controlling for subject. The probability of approval is then also the same for each survey in the marginal table collapsed over the subjects. But this implies that the true probabilities for Table 10.1 satisfy marginal homogeneity. Thus, a test of conditional independence in the 2 = 2 = 1600 table provides a test of marginal homogeneity for Table 10.1.
To test conditional independence in this three-way table, one can use the CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel ЕҪCMH. statistic ЕҪ6.6.. The result of that chisquared statistic is algebraically identical to the squared McNemarвҖҷs statistic, namely ЕҪ n21 y n12 .2rЕҪ n12 q n21. for tables of form ЕҪ10.1.. McNemarвҖҷs test is a special case of the CMH test applied to the binary responses of n matched pairs displayed in n partial tables. This connection is not helpful for computational purposes, since the McNemar statistic is simple. But it does suggest

TABLE 10.2 Representation of Four Types of Matched Pairs Contributing to Counts in Table 10.1

Response

Subject

Survey

Approve

Disapprove

1

First

1

0

Second

1

0

2

First

0

1

Second

0

1

3

First

0

1

Second

1

0

4

First

1

0

Second

0

1

414

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

ways of handling more complex matched data. With several outcome categories or several observations, one can test marginal homogeneity by applying the generalized CMH tests ЕҪSection 7.5. using a single stratum for each subject, with each row representing a particular observation ЕҪDarroch 1981; Mantel and Byar 1978..
Coming sections refer to the 2 = 2 = n table representation of matchedpairs data as the subject-specific table. They refer to the 2 = 2 table of form of Table 10.1 as the population-aВ®eraged table, since its margins provide direct estimates of population marginal proportions.

10.2 CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION FOR BINARY MATCHED PAIRS
In Section 6.7 we introduced conditional logistic regression for eliminating nuisance parameters from an analysis. We now study this for binary matched-pairs data. The models refer to subject-specific tables.

10.2.1 Marginal versus Conditional Models for Matched Pairs

The analyses of Section 10.1 occur in the context of models. Let ЕҪY1, Y2 . denote the pair of observations for a randomly selected subject, where a вҖҳвҖҳ1вҖҷвҖҷ outcome denotes category 1 ЕҪsuccess. and вҖҳвҖҳ0вҖҷвҖҷ denotes category 2. The difference вҗҰ s PЕҪY2 s 1. y PЕҪY1 s 1. between marginal probabilities occurs as a parameter in

P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗҰ xt ,

ЕҪ 10 .5.

where x1 s 0 and x2 s 1; then, PЕҪY1 s 1. s вҗЈ and PЕҪY2 s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗҰ. Alternatively, the logit link yields

logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xt .

ЕҪ 10 .6.

The parameter вҗӨ is a log odds ratio with the marginal distributions. Models ЕҪ10.5. and ЕҪ10.6. are marginal models: They focus on the marginal
distributions of responses for the two observations. For instance, in terms of the population-averaged table, the ML estimate of вҗӨ in ЕҪ10.6. is the log odds
ratio of marginal proportions, вҗӨЛҶs logw pq1 p2qrpq2 p1qx. See Problem 10.26
for its asymptotic variance.
By contrast, the subject-specific table having strata like Table 10.2 implicitly allows probabilities to vary by subject. Let ЕҪYi1, Yi2 . denote the ith pair of observations, i s 1, . . . , n. A model then has the form

link P ЕҪ Yit s 1. s вҗЈi q вҗӨ xt .

ЕҪ 10 .7.

This is called a conditional model, since the effect вҗӨ is defined conditional on the subject. Its estimate describes conditional association for the three-way table stratified by subject. The effect is subject-specific, since it is defined at

CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION FOR BINARY MATCHED PAIRS

415

the subject level. By contrast, the effects in marginal models ЕҪ10.5. and ЕҪ10.6. are population-aВ®eraged, since they refer to averaging over the entire population rather than to individual subjects.
For the identity link, subject-specific and population-averaged effects are identical. For instance, for the conditional model ЕҪ10.7. with identity link, вҗӨ s PЕҪYi2 s 1. y PЕҪYi1 s 1. for all i, and averaging this over subjects in the population equates вҗӨ to the вҗҰ parameter in model ЕҪ10.5.. For nonlinear links, however, the effects differ. For model ЕҪ10.7. with the logit link, for instance,
P ЕҪ Yit s 1. s expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ xt . r 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ xt . .
The average of this for the population does not have the form expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xt.rw1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ xt.x corresponding to the marginal logit model ЕҪ10.6.. We now take a closer look at the conditional model with logit link.

10.2.2 A Logit Model with Subject-Specific Probabilities

Model ЕҪ10.7. differs from models in earlier chapters by permitting subjects to have their own probability distributions. Cox ЕҪ1958b, 1970. and Rasch ЕҪ1961.
presented this model with logit link. This model for Yit, observation t for subject i, is

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1. s вҗЈi q вҗӨ xt ,

ЕҪ 10 .8.

where x1 s 0 and x2 s 1. Although permitting subject-specific distributions, it assumes a common effect вҗӨ. For subject i,

P ЕҪ Yi1 s 1. s expЕҪвҗЈi . , 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi .

P ЕҪ Yi2 s 1. s expЕҪвҗЈi . q вҗӨ . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

The parameter вҗӨ compares the response distributions. For each subject, the odds of success for observation 2 are expЕҪвҗӨ. times the odds for observa-
tion 1. Given the parameters, with model ЕҪ10.8. one normally assumes indepen-
dence of responses for different subjects and for the two observations on the
same subject. However, averaged over all subjects, the responses are nonnegatively associated. Suppose that < вҗӨ < is small compared to < вҗЈi <. A subject with a large positive вҗЈi has high PЕҪYit s 1. for each t and is likely to have a success each time; a subject with a large negative вҗЈi has low PЕҪYit s 1. for each t and is likely to have a failure each time. The greater the variability in Г„вҗЈi4, the greater the overall positive association between responses, successes ЕҪfailures. for observation 1 tending to occur with successes ЕҪfailures. for observation 2. This is true for any вҗӨ. The positive association reflects the shared value of вҗЈi for each observation in a pair. No association occurs only when Г„вҗЈi4 are identical. Thus, the model does account for the dependence in matched pairs. Fitting it takes into account nonnegative association through
the structure of the model.

416

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

For this model, the large number of Г„вҗЈi4 causes difficulties with the fitting process and with the properties of ordinary ML estimators ЕҪProblem 10.24.. The remedy of conditional ML treats them as nuisance parameters and maximizes the likelihood function for a conditional distribution that eliminates them. A note on terminology: WeвҖҷve referred to model ЕҪ10.8. as a conditional model, meaning that its effect вҗӨ is subject-specific, conditional on the subject. The analyses described below for such models are examples of conditional logistic regression; but here the term conditional refers to the ML analysis that is performed conditional on sufficient statistics for nuisance parameters, to eliminate those parameters from the likelihood.

10.2.3 Conditional ML Inference for Binary Matched Pairs

For model ЕҪ10.8., assuming independence of responses for different subjects and for the two observations on the same subject, the joint mass function for Г„ЕҪ y11, y12 ., . . . , ЕҪ yn1, yn2 .4 is

Еҫ / Еҫ / n expЕҪвҗЈi. yi1 1 1yy i1

ЕҒ

is1 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi .

1 q expЕҪвҗЈi .

Еҫ / Еҫ / expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .
= 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

yi2 1
1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

1yy i2
.

In terms of the data, this is proportional to

Еҫ / exp Гқ вҗЈi ЕҪ yi1 q yi2 . q вҗӨ Гқ yi2 .

i

i

To eliminate Г„вҗЈi4, we condition on their sufficient statistics, the pairwise success totals Г„Si s yi1 q yi24. Given Si s 0, PЕҪYi1 s Yi2 s 0. s 1, and given Si s 2, PЕҪYi1 s Yi2 s 1. s 1. The distribution of ЕҪYi1, Yi2 . depends on вҗӨ only when Si s 1; that is, only when outcomes differ for the two responses. Given yi1 q yi2 s 1, the conditional distribution is

P ЕҪ Yi1 s yi1 , Yi2 s yi2 < Si s 1.

s P ЕҪ Yi1 s yi1 , Yi2 s yi2 . P ЕҪ Yi1 s 1, Yi2 s 0. q P ЕҪ Yi1 s 0, Yi2 s 1.

Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / expЕҪвҗЈi. yi1 1 1yy i1 expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ . yi2 1 1yy i2

1 q expЕҪвҗЈi .

1 q expЕҪвҗЈi .

1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

s expЕҪвҗЈi . 1

1

expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

q

1 q expЕҪвҗЈi . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

s expЕҪ вҗӨ . r 1 q expЕҪ вҗӨ . , yi1 s 0, yi2 s 1 s 1r 1 q expЕҪ вҗӨ . , yi1 s 1, yi2 s 0.

CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION FOR BINARY MATCHED PAIRS

417

Again, let Г„nab4 denote the counts for the four possible sequences. For subjects having Si s 1, Гқi yi1 s n12 , the number of subjects having success for observation 1 and failure for observation 2. Similarily, for those subjects, Гқi yi2 s n21 and Гқi Si s n* s n12 q n21. Since n21 is the sum of n* independent, identical Bernoulli variates, its conditional distribution is binomial with parameter expЕҪвҗӨ.rw1 q expЕҪвҗӨ.x. For testing marginal homogeneity ЕҪ вҗӨ s 0., the parameter equals 21 . In summary, the conditional analysis for the logit model implies that pairs in which yi1 s yi2 are irrelevant to inference about вҗӨ. When this model is realistic, it provides justification for comparing
marginal distributions using only the n12 q n21 pairings having outcomes in different categories at the two observations.
Conditional on Si s 1, the joint distribution of the matched pairs is

Еҫ / Еҫ / 1 yi1 expЕҪвҗӨ . yi2 expЕҪвҗӨ . n21

ЕҒ

s

n*

Sis1 1 q expЕҪ вҗӨ .

1 q expЕҪ вҗӨ .

1 q expЕҪ вҗӨ .

ЕҪ 10 .9.

where the product refers to all pairs having Si s 1. Differentiating the log of this conditional likelihood and equating to 0 and solving yields the conditional ML estimator of вҗӨ in model ЕҪ10.8.. You can check that it and its
standard error are

вҗӨЛҶs logЕҪ n21rn12 . , SE s '1rn21 q 1rn12 .

ЕҪ 10 .10.

10.2.4 Random Effects in Binary Matched-Pairs Model
An alternative remedy to handling the huge number of nuisance parameters in logit model ЕҪ10.8. treats Г„вҗЈi4 as random effects. This regards Г„вҗЈi4 as an unobserved random sample from a probability distribution, usually assumed to be NЕҪвҗ®, вҗҙ 2 . with unknown вҗ® and вҗҙ . It eliminates Г„вҗЈi4 by averaging with respect to their distribution, yielding a marginal distribution. The likelihood function then depends on вҗӨ as well as the NЕҪвҗ®, вҗҙ 2 . parameters. It has only three parameters and is more manageable. For matched pairs with non-
negative sample log odds ratio, this approach also yields вҗӨЛҶs logЕҪ n21rn12 .
ЕҪNeuhaus et al. 1994.. This model is an example of a generalized linear mixed model, containing both random effects and the fixed effect вҗӨ. Its analysis is presented in Chapter 12.
Model ЕҪ10.8. implies that the true odds ratio for each of the n subjectspecific partial tables equals expЕҪвҗӨ.. In Section 6.3.5 we presented the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimate of a common odds ratio for several 2 = 2 tables. In fact, that estimator applied to subject-specific tables of the form shown in Table 10.2 is algebraically identical to n21rn12 for tables of the form shown in Table 10.1. ЕҪRecall that partial tables with responses in only one column do not contribute to the CMH test or MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimate.. In summary, the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimate, the conditional ML estimate, and

418

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

ЕҪwith nonnegative log odds ratio. the ML estimate for the random effects
version of logit model ЕҪ10.8. yield expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ. s n21rn12 .

10.2.5 Logistic Regression for Matched CaseвҖ“Control Studies
The two observations ЕҪ yi1, yi2 . in a matched pair need not refer to the same subject. For instance, caseбҺҗcontrol studies that match a single control with each case yield matched-pairs data. For a binary response Y, each case ЕҪY s 1. is matched with a control ЕҪY s 0. according to criteria that could affect the response. Subjects in the matched pairs are measured on the predictor variableЕҪs. of interest, X, and the XY association is analyzed.
Table 10.3 illustrates. A caseбҺҗcontrol study of acute myocardial infarction ЕҪMI. among Navajo Indians matched 144 victims of MI according to age and gender with 144 people free of heart disease. Subjects were asked whether they had ever been diagnosed as having diabetes ЕҪ x s 0, no; x s 1, yes.. Table 10.3 has the same form as Table 10.1 except that the levels of X rather than the levels of Y form the rows and the columns.
One can display the data for each matched caseбҺҗcontrol pair using a partial table of the form shown in Table 10.2, but reversing the roles of X and Y. The X values have four possible patterns, shown in Table 10.4. There are 37 partial tables of type a, since for 37 pairs the case had diabetes and the control did not, 16 partial tables of type b, 9 of type c, and 82 of type d.
Now, for subject t in matched pair i, consider the model

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1. s вҗЈi q вҗӨ xit .

ЕҪ 10 .11.

TABLE 10.3 Previous Diagnoses of Diabetes for Myocardial Infarction (MI) CaseвҖ“Control Pairs

MI Controls

MI Cases

Diabetes

No Diabetes

Total

Diabetes

9

No diabetes

37

16

25

82

119

Total

46

98

144

Source: J. L. Coulehan et al., Amer. J. Public Health 76: 412бҺҗ414 ЕҪ1986., reprinted with permission from the American Public Health Association.

TABLE 10.4 Possible CaseвҖ“Control Pairs for Table 10.3

a

b

c

Diabetes Case Control Case Control Case Control

Yes

1

0

0

1

1

1

No

0

1

1

0

0

0

d

Case Control

0

0

1

1

CONDITIONAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION FOR BINARY MATCHED PAIRS

419

The probabilities modeled refer to the distribution of Y given X, but the retrospective study provides information only about the distribution of X given Y. One can estimate the odds ratio expЕҪвҗӨ., however, since it refers to the XY odds ratio, which relates to both conditional distributions ЕҪSections 2.2.4, 5.1.4.. Even though this study reverses the roles of X and Y in terms of which is fixed and which is random, the conditional ML estimate of expЕҪвҗӨ. is simply n21rn12 s 37r16 s 2.3.

10.2.6 Conditional ML for Matched Pairs with Multiple Predictors When the binary response has p predictors for caseбҺҗcontrol or subjectspecific matched pairs, the model generalizes to
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1. s вҗЈi q вҗӨ1 x1it q вҗӨ2 x2 it q РёРёРё qвҗӨp x pit , ЕҪ 10.12.

where xhit denotes the value of predictor h for observation t in pair i,

t s 1, 2. Typically, one predictor is an explanatory variable of interest, such

as diabetes status. The others are covariates being controlled, in addition to

those already controlled by virtue of using them to form the matched pairs.

The conditional ML approach to estimating Г„ вҗӨj4 conditions on sufficient

statistics for вҗЈi to eliminate them from the likelihood.

Let

x it

s

ЕҪ x1it,

.

.

.

,

X
xpit.

and

вҗӨ s ЕҪвҗӨ1, . . . , вҗӨp.X.

A

generalization

of

the

derivation in Section 10.2.3 shows that

P ЕҪ Yi1 s 0, Yi2 s 1 < Si s 1. s expЕҪx i2X вҗӨ . expЕҪx i1X вҗӨ . q expЕҪx i2X вҗӨ . , P ЕҪ Yi1 s 1, Yi2 s 0 < Si s 1. s expЕҪx i1X вҗӨ . expЕҪx i1X вҗӨ . q expЕҪx i2X вҗӨ . . ЕҪ10.13.

Dividing numerator and denominator by expЕҪxXi1вҗӨ. shows that the first equation has the form of logistic regression with no intercept and with
predictor values x*i s x i2 y x i1. In fact, one can obtain conditional ML estimates for model ЕҪ10.12. by fitting a logistic regression model to those pairs alone, using artificial response y* s 1 when ЕҪ yi1 s 0, yi2 s 1., y* s 0 when ЕҪ yi1 s 1, yi2 s 0., no intercept, and predictor values x*i . This addresses the same likelihood as the conditional likelihood ЕҪBreslow et al. 1978; Chamberlain 1980..
To illustrate, for model ЕҪ10.11. with Table 10.3, let yi* s yi2 y yi1 and x*i s xi2 y xi1. If t s 1 refers to the control and t s 2 to the case, then yi* s 1 always. Since xit s 1 represents вҖҳвҖҳ yesвҖҷвҖҷ for diabetes and xit s 0 represents вҖҳвҖҳno,вҖҷвҖҷ ЕҪ yi* s 1, x*i s y1. for 16 observations, ЕҪ yi* s 1, x*i s 0. for 9 q 82 s 91 observations, and yi* s 1, x*i s q1. for 37 observations. The
logit model that forces вҗЈЛҶ s 0 has вҗӨЛҶs 0.84. With a single binary predictor,
the estimate is identical to logЕҪ n21rn12 ..

420

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

10.2.7 Marginal Models and Conditional Models: Extensions
For binary matched-pairs data, Section 10.1 presented analyses for a marginal ЕҪi.e., population-averaged. model, and this section presented analyses for a conditional ЕҪi.e., subject-specific. model. These models generalize to multinomial responses and to matched sets. For instance, Chamberlain ЕҪ1980. discussed conditional ML for matched pairs on a multinomial response. For binary responses, model ЕҪ10.12. applies when вҗЈi refers to a set of repeated measurements on subject i. Or, it could refer to a matched set that is a cluster of subjects, such as children from family i or fetuses from litter i.
With extensions of the conditional model to matched-set clusters, the conditional ML approach is restricted to estimating вҗӨj that are withincluster effects, such as occur in caseбҺҗcontrol and crossover studies. For these, the explanatory variable varies in t for each i. Conditional ML cannot estimate a between-cluster effect. Statistics providing information about such an effect use subject totals at different levels of the relevant explanatory variable; however, those totals sum the sufficient statistics for Г„вҗЈi4, so they are themselves fixed and have degenerate distributions after conditioning on the sufficient statistics. An explanatory variable that is constant in t for each i cancels out of the conditional likelihood. wYou can observe this for matched pairs with ЕҪ10.13. for any j for which x ji1 s x ji2 all i.x For it, at best one can stratify by its levels and fit a model estimating within-cluster effects separately at each level. An advantage of using the random effects approach instead of conditional ML with the conditional model is that it is not restricted to estimating within-cluster effects.
In the remainder of this chapter we emphasize marginal models for matched pairs with multinomial responses. In the following chapter we deal with marginal model extensions allowing matched sets and explanatory variables. Conditional models using a random effects approach have extra computational complexities. We mention briefly some multinomial conditional models in this chapter, but we defer most discussion to Chapter 12.

10.3 MARGINAL MODELS FOR SQUARE CONTINGENCY TABLES
Matched pairs analyses generalize from binary to I ) 2 outcome categories. A square I = I table Г„nab4 shows counts of possible sequences ЕҪ a, b. of outcomes for ЕҪY1, Y2 .. Let вҗІab s PЕҪY1 s a, Y2 s b.. Marginal homogeneity is PЕҪY1 s a. s PЕҪY2 s a. for a s 1, . . . , I. Marginal models compare Г„ PЕҪY1 s a.4 and Г„ PЕҪY2 s a.4.
10.3.1 Marginal Models for Ordinal Classifications For ordered categories, marginal model ЕҪ10.6. for binary matched pairs extends using ordinal logits. With cumulative logits,
logit P ЕҪ Yt F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ xt , t s 1, 2, j s 1, . . . , I y 1, ЕҪ10.14.

MARGINAL MODELS FOR SQUARE CONTINGENCY TABLES

421

where x1 s 0 and x2 s 1. This model has proportional odds structure ЕҪSection 7.2.2.. The odds of outcome Y2 F j equal expЕҪвҗӨ. times the odds of outcome Y1 F j. The model implies stochastically ordered marginal distributions, with вҗӨ ) 0 meaning that Y1 tends to be higher than Y2. Marginal homogeneity corresponds to вҗӨ s 0.
Model fitting treats ЕҪY1, Y2 . as dependent. The ML approach maximizes the multinomial likelihood for Г„вҗІab4. This is not simple. Since the model refers to marginal probabilities Г„ PЕҪY1 s a. s вҗІaq4 and Г„ PЕҪY2 s b. s вҗІqb4, one cannot substitute the model formula in the kernel ГқaГқb nab log вҗІab of the log likelihood, which has joint probabilities. We defer discussion of ML model fitting of marginal models to Section 11.2.5. Model ЕҪ10.14. describes the 2ЕҪ I y 1. marginal probabilities by I parameters, so df s I y 2 for testing
fit. Alternatively, one can compare margins using summaries such as a difference in means for chosen category scores ЕҪProblem 10.38..

10.3.2 Premarital and Extramarital Sex Example
Refer to Table 10.5. For a General Social Survey, subjects gave their opinion about premarital sex ЕҪa couple having sex before marriage. and extramarital sex ЕҪa married person having sex with someone other than the marriage partner.. The response categories are 1 s always wrong, 2 s almost always wrong, 3 s wrong only sometimes, 4 s not wrong at all.
The sample cumulative marginal proportions are ЕҪ0.307, 0.389, 0.611. for premarital sex and ЕҪ0.815, 0.918, 0.987. for extramarital sex. This suggests that responses on premarital sex tended to be higher on the ordinal scale than those on extramarital sex. With scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4., the mean for premarital sex is 2.69, closest to the вҖҳвҖҳ wrong only sometimesвҖҷвҖҷ score, and the mean response for extramarital sex is 1.28, closest to the вҖҳвҖҳalways wrongвҖҷвҖҷ score.
The cumulative logit model ЕҪ10.14. has вҗӨЛҶs 2.51 ЕҪSE s 0.13.. There is
strong evidence that population responses are more positive on premarital than on extramarital sex. The fit of the marginal homogeneity model has G2 s 348.1 ЕҪdf s 3., and the fit of model ЕҪ10.14. has G2 s 35.1 ЕҪdf s 2.. The ordinal model does not fit well, but it fits much better than the marginal homogeneity model. Models to be considered in Section 10.4.7 fit better yet.

TABLE 10.5 Opinions on Premarital Sex and Extramarital Sex

Premarital

Extramarital Sex

Sex

1

2

3

4

1

144

2

0

0

2

33

4

2

0

3

84

14

6

1

4

126

29

25

5

Total

387

49

33

6

Source: 1989 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

Total
146 39 105 185
475

422

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

10.3.3 Marginal Models for Nominal Classifications
With nominal responses, it is not sensible to assume the same effect for each logit. A baseline-category logit model has form

log P ЕҪ Yt s j . rP ЕҪ Yt s I . s вҗЈj q вҗӨj xt ,

t s 1, 2,

j s 1, . . . , I y 1,
ЕҪ 10 .15.

where x1 s 0 and x2 s 1. This model has 2ЕҪ I y 1. parameters for the 2ЕҪ I y 1. marginal probabilities. It is saturated.
Marginal homogeneity is the special case вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨIy1 s 0. To fit it, Lipsitz et al. ЕҪ1990. and Madanksy ЕҪ1963. maximized the multinomial likelihood for Г„nab4 subject to these constraints. Iterative methods produce fitted
values Г„вҗ®ЛҶab4. Comparing these to Г„ nab4 using G2 or X 2 tests marginal
homogeneity, with df s I y 1. Bhapkar ЕҪ1966. tested marginal homogeneity by exploiting the asymptotic
normality of marginal proportions. Let da s pqa y paq, and let dX s ЕҪ d1, . . . , dIy1 .. It is redundant to include dI , since Гқda s 0. The sample
covariance matrix VЛҶ of 'n d has elements

ЛҶВ®ab s y ЕҪ pab q pba. y ЕҪ pqa y paq . ЕҪ pqb y pbq . for a / b,
ЛҶВ®aa s pqa q paqy 2 paa y ЕҪ pqa y paq . 2 .
Now 'n wd y EЕҪd.x has an asymptotic multivariate normal distribution with
estimated covariance matrix VЛҶ. Under marginal homogeneity, EЕҪd. s 0,
and

W s ndX VЛҶy1 d

ЕҪ 10 .16.

is asymptotically chi-squared with df s I y 1. This is a Wald test for parameters in the analog of model ЕҪ10.15. using the identity link. Stuart ЕҪ1955.
proposed W0 s ndX VЛҶy1 0 d, which uses the sample null covariance matrix VЛҶ0
and is the score test. This has
ЛҶВ®ab0 s yЕҪ pab q pba. for a / b,
ЛҶВ®aa0 s pqa q paqy 2 paa .
Ireland et al. ЕҪ1969. noted that W s W0rЕҪ1 y W0rn.. For I s 2, W0 is McNemarвҖҷs statistic, the square of ЕҪ10.4..
These tests use all I y 1 degrees of freedom available for comparisons of I pairs of marginal proportions. With ordered categories, when I is large and the dependence between classifications is strong, ordinal tests ЕҪwith df s 1. can be much more powerful ЕҪAgresti 1984, p. 209..

SYMMETRY, QUASI-SYMMETRY, AND QUASI-INDEPENDENCE

423

TABLE 10.6 Migration from 1980 to 1985, with Fit of Marginal Homogeneity Model

Residence in 1980

Northeast

Residence in 1985

Midwest

South

West

Total

Northeast Midwest South West
Total

11,607 ЕҪ11,607. 87 ЕҪ88.7. 172 ЕҪ276.5. 63 ЕҪ92.5. 11,929 ЕҪ12,064.7.

100 ЕҪ98.1. 13,677 ЕҪ13,677. 255 ЕҪ350.8. 176 ЕҪ251.3. 14,178 ЕҪ14,377.1.

366 ЕҪ265.7. 515 ЕҪ379.1. 17,819 ЕҪ17,819. 286 ЕҪ269.8. 18,986 ЕҪ18,733.5.

124 ЕҪ94.0. 302 ЕҪ323.3. 270 ЕҪ287.3. 10,192 ЕҪ10,192. 10,888 ЕҪ10,805.6.

12,197 ЕҪ12,064.7. 14,581 ЕҪ14,377.1. 18,486 ЕҪ18,733.5. 10,717 ЕҪ10,805.6. 55,981

Source: Data based on Table 12 of U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, Series P-20, No. 420, Geographical Mobility: 1985 ЕҪWashington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office., 1987.

10.3.4 Migration Example
For a sample of U.S. residents, Table 10.6 compares region of residence in 1985 with 1980. Relatively few people changed region, 95% of the observations falling on the main diagonal. The ML fit of marginal homogeneity, shown in Table 10.6, gives G2 s 240.8 ЕҪdf s 3.. Statistics using differences in sample marginal proportions give similar results. For instance, BhapkarвҖҷs statistic ЕҪ10.16. is W s 236.5 ЕҪdf s 3..
The sample marginal proportions for the four regions were ЕҪ0.218, 0.260, 0.330, 0.191. in 1980 and ЕҪ0.213, 0.253, 0.339, 0.194. in 1985. Little change occurred over such a short time period. The large test statistics reflect the huge sample size. To estimate the change for a given region, we apply ЕҪ10.2. to the collapsed 2 = 2 table that combines the other regions. A 95% confidence interval for вҗІq1 y вҗІ 1q is ЕҪ0.2131 y 0.2179. " 1.96ЕҪ0.00054., or y0.005 " 0.001. Similarly, a 95% confidence interval for вҗІq2 y вҗІ 2q is y0.007 " 0.001, for вҗІq3 y вҗІ 3q is 0.009 " 0.001, and for вҗІq4 y вҗІ4q is 0.003 " 0.001. Although strong evidence of change occurs for all four regions, the changes were small.

10.4 SYMMETRY, QUASI-SYMMETRY, AND QUASI-INDEPENDENCE
An alternative analysis of square contingency tables directly models the joint distribution using logit or loglinear models. Some models have marginal homogeneity as a special case.

424

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

An I = I joint distribution Г„вҗІab4 satisfies symmetry if

вҗІab s вҗІ ba whenever a / b.

ЕҪ 10 .17.

Under symmetry, вҗІaqs ГқbвҗІab s ГқbвҗІ ba s вҗІqa for all a, so marginal homogeneity occurs. For I s 2, symmetry is equivalent to marginal homogeneity,
but for I ) 2, marginal homogeneity can occur without symmetry.

10.4.1 Symmetry as Logit and Loglinear Models

When all вҗІab ) 0, symmetry is a logit and a loglinear model. In logit form, it is trivially

logЕҪвҗІabrвҗІ ba. s 0 for all a - b.

For expected frequencies Г„вҗ®ab s nвҗІab4, it has the loglinear form

log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯa q вҗӯb q вҗӯab

ЕҪ 10 .18.

where all вҗӯab s вҗӯba. Both classifications have the same single-factor parameters Г„вҗӯa4, so log вҗ®ab s log вҗ®ba. Identifiability requires constraints. A simpler expression is log вҗ®ab s вҗӯab, with all вҗӯab s вҗӯba.
For Poisson or multinomial cell counts Г„nab4, the likelihood equations are

вҗ®ЛҶab q вҗ®ЛҶba s nab q nba for all a - b and вҗ®ЛҶaa s naa for all a.

The main diagonal has perfect fit. The solution that satisfies symmetry is

nab q nba
вҗ®ЛҶab s
2

for all a, b.

Еҫ / The logit symmetry model has no parameters for the

I 2

binomial pairs

Г„ЕҪ nab, nba.4 with a - b, so its residual df s IЕҪ I y 1.r2. Equivalently, the

loglinear symmetry model log вҗ®ab s вҗӯab ЕҪ вҗӯab s вҗӯba. for I 2 Poisson counts

Еҫ / Г„nab4 has I2 Г„вҗӯab4 with a - b and I Г„вҗӯaa4, so df s I 2 y w I q IЕҪ I y 1.r2x s
IЕҪ I y 1.r2. For testing symmetry, Bowker ЕҪ1948. showed that X 2 simplifies

to

X 2 ЕҪ n s ГқГқ ab y nba. 2 .
a-b nab q nb a

For I s 2 this is McNemarвҖҷs statistic, the square of ЕҪ10.4.. The standardized Pearson residuals equal

rab s ЕҪ nab y nb a . ЕҪ nab q nb a . 1r2 .

SYMMETRY, QUASI-SYMMETRY, AND QUASI-INDEPENDENCE

425

Only one residual for each pair of categories is nonredundant, since rab s yrba. They satisfy Гқa- b rab2 s X 2.
The symmetry model is very simple. Except for a few specialized applications, such as describing intraobserver agreement for pairs of measurements by an observer, it rarely fits well. When the marginal distributions differ substantially, it fits poorly.

10.4.2 Quasi-symmetry
One can accommodate marginal heterogeneity by permitting the main-effect terms in the symmetry model ЕҪ10.18. to differ. The resulting loglinear model, called quasi-symmetry, is

log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯaX q вҗӯbY q вҗӯab ,

ЕҪ 10 .19.

where вҗӯab s вҗӯba for all a - b ЕҪCaussinus 1966.. Symmetry is the special case вҗӯXa s вҗӯYa for a s 1, . . . , I, and independence is the special case in which all вҗӯab s 0.
The likelihood equations for quasi-symmetry are

вҗ®ЛҶaqs naq, a s 1, . . . , I вҗ®ЛҶqb s nqb , b s 1, . . . , I вҗ®ЛҶab q вҗ®ЛҶba s nab q nba for a F b.

ЕҪ 10 .20.

Only one of the first two sets of equations is needed. The other is redundant, given the other two. The residual df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ I y 2.r2. From ЕҪ10.20.,
вҗ®ЛҶaa s naa for a s 1, . . . , I. Otherwise, the likelihood equations do not have a
direct solution. They are solved using iterative methods such as NewtonбҺҗRaphson and IPF ЕҪCaussinus 1966..
The quasi-symmetry model has multiplicative form

вҗІab s вҗЈa вҗӨbвҗҘab , where вҗҘab s вҗҘ ba all a - b

ЕҪ 10 .21.

and all parameters are positive. The symmetry model is ЕҪ10.21. with вҗЈa s вҗӨa for all a. This equation indicates that a table satisfying quasi-symmetry is the cellwise product of a table satisfying independence with one satisfying symmetry. The association symmetry implies that odds ratios on one side of the main diagonal are identical to corresponding odds ratios on the other side. In fact, the model can be defined by properties such as

вҗ®ab вҗ®II

вҗ®ba вҗ®II

s

вҗ®aI вҗ®Ib

вҗ®bI вҗ®Ia

for all a - b

ЕҪ 10 .22.

or вҗӘab s вҗӘba for local odds ratios. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. referred to it as the symmetric association model.

426

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

The meaning of quasi-symmetry is less obvious than symmetry. However, it usually fits much better and has greater scope. One way to interpret its parameters relates to subject-specific logit models. For such models having additivity of subject terms and occasion terms, of which model ЕҪ10.8. is the simplest case, the joint distribution in the corresponding population-averaged table necessarily satisfies quasi-symmetry ЕҪsee Darroch 1981; Section 13.2.7 shows this.. Consider the generalization of baseline-category logit model ЕҪ10.15. to a subject-specific model
log P ЕҪ Yit s j . rP ЕҪ Yit s I . s вҗЈi j q вҗӨj xt , t s 1, 2, j s 1, . . . , I y 1.
This has the additive form of ЕҪ10.8. for each j. The model implies, averaging over subjects, that the quasi-symmetry model ЕҪ10.19. holds for the I = I population-averaged table with Г„ вҗӨj s вҗӯjY y вҗӯjX 4, when one constrains вҗӯIX s вҗӯIY s 0. In fact, for the conditional ML analysis that conditions out Г„вҗЈi j4, the
conditional ML estimates of Г„ вҗӨЛҶj4 relate to the ordinary ML fit of quasi-symmetry by Г„ вҗӨЛҶj s вҗӯЛҶYj y вҗӯЛҶXj 4 ЕҪConaway 1989.. This provides an interpretation for
the main-effect terms in quasi-symmetry. Related results hold for multiple occasions using a multivariate form
ЕҪ10.33. of quasi-symmetry ЕҪe.g., Agresti 1997; Conaway 1989; Darroch 1981; Tjur 1982; see also Section 13.2.7.. In addition, quasi-symmetry contains as a special case other useful models. These include the ones in Sections 10.4.3 and 10.6.3.

10.4.3 Quasi-independence

Square tables usually exhibit positive dependence, manifested by larger counts on the main diagonal than the independence model predicts. Conditional on the event that a matched pair falls off the main diagonal, though, the relationship may have a simple structure.
A square contingency table satisfies quasi-independence when the variables are independent, given that the row and column outcomes differ. This has the loglinear form

log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯaX q вҗӯbY q вҗҰa I ЕҪ a s b. ,

ЕҪ 10 .23.

where IЕҪРё. is the indicator function,
ВҪ IЕҪ a s b. s 1, 0,

asb a / b.

This adds a parameter to the independence model for each cell on the main diagonal. The first three terms in ЕҪ10.23. specify independence, and Г„вҗҰa4 permit Г„вҗ®aa4 to depart from this pattern and have arbitrary positive values. When вҗҰa ) 0, вҗ®aa is larger than under independence.
The likelihood equations for quasi-independence are

вҗ®ЛҶaqs naq, вҗ®ЛҶqa s nqa , вҗ®ЛҶaa s naa , a s 1, . . . , I.

SYMMETRY, QUASI-SYMMETRY, AND QUASI-INDEPENDENCE

427

A perfect fit occurs on the main diagonal, but independence holds for the
remaining cells. The model implies that odds ratios equal 1.0 for all rectangularly formed 2 = 2 tables in which all cells fall off the main diagonal. One can fit the model using NewtonбҺҗRaphson or IPF. The model has I more parameters than the independence model, so its residual df s ЕҪ I y 1.2 y I.
It applies to tables with I G 3. Quasi-independence is the special case of quasi-symmetry ЕҪ10.21. in which
Г„вҗҘab for a / b4 are identical. Caussinus ЕҪ1966, p. 146. showed that they are equivalent when I s 3.

10.4.4 Migration Revisited
We now return to Table 10.6 on migration patterns. Not surprisingly, the independence model fits terribly, with G2 s 125,923 and X 2 s 146,929. ЕҪThe maximum possible value of X 2 is 3n s 167,943; see Problem 3.33.. The symmetry model is also unpromising. For instance, 124 people moved from the northeast to the west, but only 63 people made the reverse move. The deviance for testing symmetry is G2 s 243.6 ЕҪdf s 6..
Quasi-independence states that for people who moved, residence in 1985 is independent of region in 1980. Table 10.7 contains its fitted values, for which G2 s 69.5 ЕҪdf s 5.. This model fits much better than the independence model, primarily because it forces a perfect fit on the main diagonal, where most observations occur. However, lack of fit is apparent off that diagonal. Many more people moved from the northeast to the south and many fewer moved from the west to the south than quasi-independence predicts.

TABLE 10.7 Fit of Models to Table 10.6

Residence in 1980

Northeast

Residence in 1985a

Midwest

South

West

Total

Northeast

11,607

100 ЕҪ126.6.1 ЕҪ95.8.2

366 ЕҪ312.9. ЕҪ370.4.

124 ЕҪ150.5. ЕҪ123.8.

12,197

Midwest

87 ЕҪ117.4. ЕҪ91.2.

13,677

515 ЕҪ531.1. ЕҪ501.7.

302 ЕҪ255.5. ЕҪ311.1.

14,581

South

172 ЕҪ133.2. ЕҪ167.6.

255 ЕҪ243.8. ЕҪ238.3.

17,189

270 ЕҪ290.0. ЕҪ261.1.

18,486

West

63 ЕҪ71.4. ЕҪ63.2.

176 ЕҪ130.6. ЕҪ166.9.

286 ЕҪ323.0. ЕҪ294.9.

10,192

10,717

Total

11,929

14,178

18,986

10,888

55,981

a1Quasi-independence fit; 2quasi-symmetry fit; both models giving perfect fit on main diagonal.

428

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

The quasi-symmetry model has G2 s 3.0, with df s 3. Table 10.7 displays

its fit, which is much better than with quasi-independence. The lack of

symmetry in cell probabilities reflects slight marginal heterogeneity. The

subject-specific effects can be described using the modelвҖҷs parameter esti-

mates,

Г„

вҗӯЛҶY
1

y

вҗӯЛҶX
1

s

y0.672,

вҗӯЛҶY2 y вҗӯЛҶX2 s y0.623,

вҗӯЛҶY3 y вҗӯЛҶX3 s 0.1224.

For

in-

stance, for a given subject the estimated odds of living in the south instead of the west in 1985 were expЕҪ0.122. s 1.13 times the odds in 1980. WeвҖҷll see in

Chapter 12 that such subject-specific effects tend to be stronger than those in

corresponding marginal models, especially in tables like this with strong

association.

A related application with matched samples is the study of occupational

mobility. Each observation pairs parentвҖҷs occupation with childвҖҷs occupation ЕҪGoodman 1979b; Hout et al. 1987..

10.4.5 Marginal Homogeneity and Quasi-symmetry
Marginal homogeneity is not equivalent to a loglinear model. However, quasi-symmetry is a useful model for studying marginal homogeneity. Caussinus ЕҪ1966. showed that symmetry is equivalent to quasi-symmetry and marginal homogeneity holding simultaneously. We have seen that symmetry implies both quasi-symmetry and marginal homogeneity. Now we give CaussinusвҖҷs argument for the converse, that the joint occurrence of quasisymmetry and marginal homogeneity implies symmetry.
From ЕҪ10.21., if quasi-symmetry holds, вҗІab s вҗЈa вҗӨbвҗҘab, where вҗҘab s вҗҘba ) 0 for all a - b. Equivalently,

вҗІab s вҗіa вҗҰab ,

where вҗіa s вҗЈarвҗӨa and вҗҰab s вҗӨa вҗӨbвҗҘab also satisfies вҗҰab s вҗҰba ) 0 for all a - b. If there is also marginal homogeneity, then

вҗІ jqs вҗіj Гқ вҗҰjb s Гқ вҗіa вҗҰa j s вҗІqj ,

b

a

or

Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / Еҫ / вҗіj s Гқ вҗіaвҗҰaj a

Гқ вҗҰjb s Гқ вҗіaвҗҰaj

b

a

ГқвҗҰbj ,
b

j s 1, . . . , I.

Thus, each вҗіj is a weighted average of Г„ вҗіa4, with weights Г„вҗҰa j rГқb вҗҰb j ) 0, a s 1, . . . , I4. Any set Г„ вҗіa4 satisfying this must be identical. Otherwise, there would be a вҗіj that is no greater than any вҗіa but smaller than at least one, and hence it could not be a positive weighted average of all of them. But since Г„ вҗіa4 are identical, вҗІab s вҗіaвҗҰab s вҗіb вҗҰab s вҗіb вҗҰba s вҗІ ba, so symmetry holds. Thus, a table that satisfies both quasi-symmetry and marginal homo-

SYMMETRY, QUASI-SYMMETRY, AND QUASI-INDEPENDENCE

429

geneity also satisfies symmetry. Since the converse holds,

quasi-symmetry q marginal homogeneity s symmetry. ЕҪ10.24.

It follows that when quasi-symmetry ЕҪQS. holds, marginal homogeneity ЕҪMH. is equivalent to symmetry ЕҪS., which is Г„вҗӯaX s вҗӯYa, a s 1, . . . , I4 in the QS model. Thus, conditional on quasi-symmetry, testing marginal homogene-
ity is equivalent to testing symmetry. A test of marginal homogeneity com-
pares fit statistics for the symmetry and quasi-symmetry models,

G2 ЕҪS < QS. s G2 ЕҪS. y G2 ЕҪQS. ,

ЕҪ 10 .25.

with df s I y 1. This is an alternative to approaches using marginal models discussed in Section 10.3.3.
Table 10.6 on migration from 1980 to 1985 has G2ЕҪS. s 243.6 and G2ЕҪQS. s 3.0. The difference G2ЕҪS < QS. s 240.6 ЕҪdf s 3. shows extremely strong evidence of marginal heterogeneity. Results are similar to those quoted in Section 10.3.4 for the likelihood-ratio test based on model ЕҪ10.15., for which G2 s 240.8, or the Wald test, for which W s 236.5 ЕҪboth with df s 3..

10.4.6 Ordinal Quasi-symmetry Model
The loglinear models presented so far for square tables treat classifications as nominal. With ordered categories, more parsimonious models are useful. Let u1 F РёРёРё F uI denote ordered scores for both the row and columns. An ordinal quasi-symmetry model is

log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯa q вҗӯb q вҗӨ ub q вҗӯab ,

ЕҪ 10 .26.

where вҗӯab s вҗӯba for all a - b. It is the special case of the quasi-symmetry model ЕҪ10.19. in which

вҗӯbY y вҗӯbX s вҗӨ ub

has a linear trend. Symmetry is the special case вҗӨ s 0. This model has logit representation,

logЕҪвҗІabrвҗІ ba. s вҗӨ ЕҪ ub y ua. for a F b.

ЕҪ 10 .27.

This is the special case of the linear logit model, logitЕҪвҗІ . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x, with вҗЈ s 0, x s ub y ua and вҗІ equal to the conditional probability of cell ЕҪ a,b., given response sequence ЕҪ a, b. or ЕҪ b, a.. The greater the value of < вҗӨ < , the
greater the difference between вҗІab and вҗІ ba and hence between the marginal distributions.

430

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

The likelihood equations for ordinal quasi-symmetry are

Гқ ua вҗ®ЛҶaqs Гқ ua naq,

a

a

Гқ ub вҗ®ЛҶqb s Гқ ub nqb ,

b

b

вҗ®ЛҶab q вҗ®ЛҶba s nab q nba for a - b.

The fitted marginal counts need not equal the observed marginal counts. However, dividing the first two equations by n shows that they have the same means.
When вҗӨ / 0, this model implies stochastically ordered margins. When вҗӨ ) 0 ЕҪ вҗӨ - 0., responses have a higher mean in the column ЕҪrow. distribution. Like the ordinal marginal models ЕҪSection 10.3.1., this model concentrates the marginal effect on df s 1. A test of marginal homogeneity ЕҪ H0: вҗӨ s 0. uses
ordinal quasi-symmetry q marginal homogeneity s symmetry.

The likelihood-ratio test statistic compares the deviance for symmetry and
ordinal quasi-symmetry. One can fit this model by fitting ЕҪ10.27. with logit model software: Identify
ЕҪ nab, nba. as binomial with nab q nba trials, and fit a logit model with no intercept and predictor x s ub y ua. One can also fit ЕҪ10.26. using iterative methods for loglinear models.

10.4.7 Premarital and Extramarital Sex Revisited
For Table 10.5 on attitudes toward premarital and extramarital sex, a cursory glance at the data reveals that the symmetry model is inadequate ЕҪG2 s 402.2, df s 6.. By comparison, quasi-symmetry fits well ЕҪG2 s 1.4, df s 3.. The simpler model of ordinal quasi-symmetry also fits well: With scores Г„1, 2, 3, 44, G2 s 2.1 ЕҪdf s 5..
The ML estimate вҗӨЛҶs y2.86. From ЕҪ10.27., the estimated probability that
outcome on premarital sex is x categories more positive than the outcome on extramarital sex equals expЕҪ2.86 x. times the reverse probability. For instance, the estimated probability that premarital sex is judged almost always wrong and extramarital sex is always wrong equals expЕҪ2.86. s 17.4 times the estimated probability that premarital sex is always wrong and extramarital sex is almost always wrong.

10.4.8 Other Ordinal Models for Square Tables
For ordered classifications, when symmetry does not hold, often either вҗІab ) вҗІ ba for all a - b, or вҗІab - вҗІ ba for all a - b. A generalization of

MEASURING AGREEMENT BETWEEN OBSERVERS

431

symmetry with this property is the logit model
logЕҪвҗІabrвҗІ ba. s вҗ¶ for a - b.

ЕҪ 10 .28.

It implies that for all a - b,
P ЕҪ Yi1 s a, Yi2 s b < Yi1 - Yi2 . s P ЕҪ Yi1 s b, Yi2 s a < Yi1 ) Yi2 . .

The pattern of probabilities for cells above the main diagonal is a mirror
image of the pattern for cells below it. This property is called conditional symmetry ЕҪMcCullagh 1978.. Problem 10.35 shows the corresponding loglinear model and its fit. Symmetry is the special case вҗ¶ s 0.
Another model generalizes quasi-independence. Let Г„ua4 be ordered scores. The model

log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯaX q вҗӯbY q вҗӨ ua ub q вҗҰa I ЕҪ a s b.

ЕҪ 10 .29.

permits linear-by-linear association wsee ЕҪ9.6.x off the main diagonal. It is a special case of quasi-symmetry, and quasi-independence is the special case вҗӨ s 0. For equal-interval scores, it implies uniform local association, given that responses differ. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. called it quasi-uniform association.
For Table 10.5 on opinions about premarital and extramarital sex, the
conditional symmetry model has ЛҶвҗ¶ s y4.130 ЕҪSE s 0.451.. The estimated
probability that extramarital sex is considered more wrong are expЕҪ4.13. s 62.2 times the estimated probability that premarital sex is considered more
wrong. The quasi-uniform association model has вҗӨЛҶs 0.632 ЕҪSE s 0.106.. Off
the main diagonal, the estimated local odds ratio equals expЕҪ0.632. s 1.88.

10.5 MEASURING AGREEMENT BETWEEN OBSERVERS
We now discuss an application, analyzing agreement between two observers, that uses matched-pairs models. We illustrate with Table 10.8. This shows ratings by two pathologists, labeled A and B, who separately classified 118 slides regarding the presence and extent of carcinoma of the uterine cervix. The rating scale has the ordered categories ЕҪ1. negative, ЕҪ2. atypical squamous hyperplasia, ЕҪ3. carcinoma in situ, ЕҪ4. squamous or invasive carcinoma.
10.5.1 Agreement: Departures from Independence Let вҗІab denote the probability that observer A classifies a slide in category a and observer B classifies it in category b. Then вҗІaa is the probability that they both choose category a, and ГқaвҗІaa is the total probability of agreement. Perfect agreement occurs when ГқaвҗІaa s 1.
With subjective scales, agreement is less than perfect. Analyses focus on describing strength of agreement and detecting patterns of disagreement.

432

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

TABLE 10.8 Diagnoses of Carcinoma

Pathologist Ba

Pathologist A

1

2

3

4

Total

1

22

2

2

0

26

ЕҪ8.5.

ЕҪy0.5.

ЕҪy5.9.

ЕҪy1.8.

2

5

7

14

0

26

ЕҪy0.5.

ЕҪ3.2.

ЕҪy0.5.

ЕҪy1.8.

3

0

2

36

0

38

ЕҪy4.1.

ЕҪy1.2.

ЕҪ5.5.

ЕҪy2.3.

4

0

1

17

10

28

ЕҪy3.3.

ЕҪy1.3.

ЕҪ0.3.

ЕҪ5.9.

Total

27

12

69

10

118

aValues in parentheses are standardized Pearson residuals for the independence model. Source: N. S. Holmquist, C. A. McMahon, and O. D. Williams, Arch. Pathol. 84: 334бҺҗ345 ЕҪ1967.; reprinted with permission from the American Medical Association. See also Landis and Koch ЕҪ1977..

Agreement and association are distinct facets of the joint distribution. Strong agreement requires strong association, but strong association can exist without strong agreement. If observer A consistently rates subjects one category higher than observer B, strength of agreement is poor even though the association is strong.
Evaluations of agreement compare Г„ nab4 to the values Г„ naqnqbrn4 predicted under independence. That model is a baseline, showing the agreement expected if no association existed between ratings. Normally, it fits poorly if even mild agreement exists, but its cell standardized residuals ЕҪSection 3.3.1. show patterns of agreement and disagreement. Ideally, standardized residuals are large positive on the main diagonal and large negative off that diagonal. The sizes are influenced by sample size n, however, larger values tending to occur as n increases.
The independence model fits Table 10.8 poorly ЕҪG2 s 118.0, df s 9.. That table reports the standardized Pearson residuals in parentheses. The large positive residuals on the main diagonal indicate that agreement for each category is greater than expected by chance, especially for the first category. Off the main diagonal they are primarily negative. Disagreements occurred less than expected under independence, although the evidence of this is weaker for categories closer together. The most common disagreements were observer B choosing category 3 and observer A instead choosing category 2 or 4.

10.5.2 Using Quasi-independence to Analyze Agreement
More complex models add components that relate to agreement beyond that expected under independence. A useful generalization is quasi-independence

MEASURING AGREEMENT BETWEEN OBSERVERS

TABLE 10.9 Fitted Values for Carcinoma Diagnoses of Table 10.8

Pathologist B a

Pathologist A

1

2

3

1

22

2

ЕҪ22.1

ЕҪ0.7.

ЕҪ22.2

ЕҪ2.4.

2

5

7

ЕҪ2.4.

ЕҪ7.

ЕҪ4.6.

ЕҪ7.

3

0

ЕҪ0.8.

ЕҪ1.2.

ЕҪ0.4.

ЕҪ1.6.

4

0

1

ЕҪ1.9.

ЕҪ3.0.

ЕҪ0.0.

ЕҪ1.0.

a1Quasi-independence model; 2quasi-symmetry model.

2 ЕҪ3.3. ЕҪ1.6. 14 ЕҪ16.6. ЕҪ14.4. 36 ЕҪ36. ЕҪ36. 17 ЕҪ13.1. ЕҪ17.0.

433
4 0 ЕҪ0.0. ЕҪ0.0. 0 ЕҪ0.0. ЕҪ0.0. 0 ЕҪ0.0. ЕҪ0.0. 10 ЕҪ10. ЕҪ10.

ЕҪ10.23., which adds main-diagonal parameters Г„вҗҰa4. For Table 10.8, this model has G2 s 13.2 ЕҪdf s 5.. It fits much better than independence, but some lack of fit remains. Table 10.9 shows the fit.
For two subjects, suppose that each observer classifies one in category a and one in category b. The odds that the observers agree rather than disagree on which is in category a and which is in category b equal

вҗ¶ab s s вҗІaaвҗІ bb вҗ®aa вҗ®bb . вҗІabвҗІ b a вҗ®ab вҗ®b a

ЕҪ 10 .30.

As вҗ¶ab increases, the observers are more likely to agree for that pair of categories. Under quasi-independence,
вҗ¶ab s expЕҪ вҗҰa q вҗҰb . .
Larger Г„вҗҰa4 represent stronger agreement. For instance, for Table 10.8,
вҗҰЛҶ2 s 0.6 and вҗҰЛҶ3 s 1.9, and ЛҶвҗ¶ 23 s 12.3. The degree of agreement also seems
fairly strong for other pairs of categories.

10.5.3 Quasi-symmetry and Agreement Modeling
For Table 10.8, the quasi-independence model shows some lack of fit. Given that the pathologists disagree, some association remains between ratings. For observer agreement tables, this is common. Quasi-symmetry ЕҪ10.19. often fits much better, because it permits association. For Table 10.8, it has G2 s 1.0 ЕҪdf s 2.. Table 10.9 displays the fit. It is not unusual for tables to have many

434

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

empty cells. When nab q nba s 0 for any pair ЕҪsuch as categories 1 and 4 in Table 10.8., the ML fitted values for quasi-symmetry in those cells must also
be zero since one of its likelihood equations is вҗ®ЛҶab q вҗ®ЛҶba s nab q nba. One
should eliminate those cells from the fitting process to get the proper residual df value.
Under quasi-symmetry, ЛҶвҗ¶ab s expЕҪ вҗӯЛҶaa q вҗӯЛҶbb y вҗӯЛҶab y вҗӯЛҶba., where вҗӯЛҶab s вҗӯЛҶba. For categories 2 and 3 of Table 10.8, for instance, ЛҶвҗ¶ 23 s 10.7.
Loglinear models directly address the association component of agreement. The quasi-symmetry model also yields information about similarity of marginal distributions. The simpler symmetry model that forces the margins to be identical fits Table 10.8 poorly ЕҪG2 s 39.2, df s 5.. The statistic G2ЕҪS < QS. s 39.2 y 1.0 s 38.2 ЕҪdf s 3. provides strong evidence of marginal heterogeneity. In Table 10.8, differences in marginal proportions are substantial in each category but the first. The marginal heterogeneity is one reason that the agreement is not stronger.
Models for agreement can take ordering of categories into account. Conditional on observer disagreement, a tendency usually remains for high ЕҪlow. ratings by one observer to occur with relatively high ЕҪlow. ratings by the other observer ЕҪsee Problem 10.41..

10.5.4 Kappa Measure of Agreement

An alternative approach summarizes agreement with a single index. For nominal scales, the most popular measure is CohenвҖҷs kappa ЕҪCohen 1960.. It compares the probability of agreement ГқaвҗІaa to that expected if the ratings were independent, ГқaвҗІaqвҗІqa , by
ГқaвҗІaa y ГқaвҗІaqвҗІqa вҗ¬ s 1 y ГқaвҗІaqвҗІqa .

The denominator equals the numerator with ГқaвҗІaa replaced by its maximum

possible value of 1, corresponding to perfect agreement. Kappa equals 0

when the agreement merely equals that expected under independence. It

equals 1.0 when perfect agreement occurs. The stronger the agreement, the

higher is вҗ¬ , for given marginal distributions. Negative values occur when

agreement is weaker than expected by chance, but this rarely happens.

For multinomial sampling, the sample value вҗ¬ЛҶ has a large-sample normal
distribution. Its estimated asymptotic variance ЕҪFleiss et al. 1969. is

ВҪ вҗҙЛҶ 2 ЕҪ вҗ¬ЛҶ. s 1 n

Po ЕҪ1 y Po . 2ЕҪ1 y Po . 2 Po Pe y Гқa paaЕҪ paqq pqa .

ЕҪ1 y Pe . 2 q

ЕҪ1 y Pe . 3

ЕҪ 1 y Po . 2 ГқaГқb pab ЕҪ pbqq pqa . 2 y 4 Pe2
5 q ЕҪ1 y Pe.4 ,

MEASURING AGREEMENT BETWEEN OBSERVERS

435

where Po s Гқa paa and Pe s Гқa paqpqa. It is rarely plausible that agreement is no better than expected by chance. Thus, rather than testing H0: вҗ¬ s 0, it is more relevant to estimate strength of agreement by interval estimation of вҗ¬.
For Table 10.8, Po s 0.636 and Pe s 0.281. Sample kappa equals ЕҪ0.636 y 0.281.rЕҪ1 y 0.281. s 0.493. The difference between observed agreement and
that expected under independence is about 50% of the maximum possible difference. The estimated standard error is 0.057, so вҗ¬ apparently falls
roughly between 0.4 and 0.6, moderately strong agreement.

10.5.5 Weighted Kappa: Quantifying Disagreement
Kappa treats classifications as nominal. When categories are ordered, the seriousness of a disagreement depends on the difference between the ratings. For nominal classifications also, some disagreements may be considered more severe than others. The measure weighted kappa ЕҪSpitzer et al. 1967. uses weights Г„wab4 satisfying 0 F wab F 1, with all waa s 1 and all wab s wba to describe closeness of agreement. One possibility is Г„wab s 1 y < a y b < rЕҪ I y 1.4, for which agreement is greater for cells nearer the main diagonal. Fleiss and Cohen ЕҪ1973. suggested Г„wab s 1 y ЕҪ a y b.2rЕҪ I y 1.24. The weighted agreement is ГқaГқbwabвҗІab and weighted kappa is
ГқaГқbwabвҗІab y ГқaГқbwabвҗІaqвҗІqb вҗ¬w s 1 y ГқaГқbwabвҗІaqвҗІqb .
Controversy surrounds the utility of kappa and weighted kappa, partly because their values depend strongly on the marginal distributions. The same diagnostic rating process can yield quite different values, depending on the proportions of cases of the various types ЕҪProblem 10.40.. In summarizing a contingency table by a single number, the reduction in information can be severe. It is helpful to construct models providing more detailed investigation of the agreement and disagreement structure rather than to depend solely on a summary index.

10.5.6 Extensions to Multiple Observers

With several observers, ordinary loglinear models are not usually relevant.

Their description of agreement and association between two observers is

conditional on ratings by the others. It is more relevant to study this

marginally, without conditioning on the other ratings. Hence, for R ob-

Еҫ / servers, modelling simultaneously the pairwise agreement and association

structure requires studying the

R 2

pairs of two-way marginal distributions

ЕҪBecker and Agresti 1992..

436

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

Other approaches have also been used. For instance, generalizations of kappa summarize pairwise agreements or multiple agreements ЕҪFleiss 1981, Sec. 13.2; Landis and Koch 1977.. Or, it may make sense to use a mixture model that assumes latent classes of subjects for whom the observers agree and subjects for whom they disagree. Such an analysis is shown in Section 13.1.2.

10.6 BRADLEYвҖ“TERRY MODEL FOR PAIRED PREFERENCES
Sometimes, categorical outcomes result from pairwise evaluations. A common example is athletic competitions, when the outcome for a team or player consists of categories ЕҪwin, lose.. Another example is pairwise comparison of product brands, such as two brands of wine of some type. When a wine critic rates I brands of sauvignon blanc, it might be difficult to establish an outright ranking, especially if I is large. However, for any given pair, the critic could probably state a preference after tasting them at the same occasion. An overall ranking of the wines could then be based on the pairwise preferences. We present a model for this in this section.

10.6.1 BradleyвҖ“Terry Model
Bradley and Terry ЕҪ1952. proposed a logit model for paired evaluations. Let вҢё ab denote the probability that a is preferred to b. Suppose that вҢё ab q вҢё ba s 1 for all pairs; that is, a tie cannot occur. The BradleyбҺҗTerry model is

log s вҢё ab вҗӨa y вҗӨb . вҢёba

ЕҪ 10 .31.

Alternatively,

вҢё ab s expЕҪ вҗӨa. r expЕҪ вҗӨa. q expЕҪ вҗӨb . .

Thus, вҢё ab s 21 when вҗӨa s вҗӨb and вҢё ab ) 21 when вҗӨa ) вҗӨb.
Identifiability requires a constraint such as вҗӨI s 0 or ГқaexpЕҪвҗӨЛҶa. s 1.

Еҫ / Since the model describes

I 2

probabilities ЕҪГ„вҢё ab4 for a - b. by ЕҪ I y 1.

Еҫ / parameters, residual df s I y ЕҪI y 1.. 2

For a - b, let Nab denote the sample number of evaluations, with a

preferred nab times and b preferred nba s Nab y nab times. A square

contingency table with empty cells on the main diagonal summarizes results.

When the Nab comparisons are independent with probability вҢё ab for each, nab has a binЕҪ Nab, вҢё ab. distribution. If evaluations for different pairs are also

independent, ordinary methods for logit models apply for fitting the model.

BRADLEYбҺҗTERRY MODEL FOR PAIRED PREFERENCES

437

TABLE 10.10 Results of 1987 Season for American League Baseball Teams

Winning Team
Milwaukee Detroit Toronto New York Boston Cleveland Baltimore

Milwaukee бҺҸ
6 ЕҪ6.0. 4 ЕҪ5.6. 6 ЕҪ5.4. 6 ЕҪ5.0. 4 ЕҪ3.8. 2 ЕҪ2.2.

Detroit
7 ЕҪ7.0. бҺҸ
6 ЕҪ6.0. 8 ЕҪ5.9. 2 ЕҪ5.4. 4 ЕҪ4.2. 4 ЕҪ2.5.

Losing Teama

Toronto
9 ЕҪ7.4. 7 ЕҪ7.0.
бҺҸ 6 ЕҪ6.3. 6 ЕҪ5.9. 5 ЕҪ4.6. 1 ЕҪ2.8.

New York
7 ЕҪ7.6. 5 ЕҪ7.1. 7 ЕҪ6.7.
бҺҸ 7 ЕҪ6.0. 6 ЕҪ4.7. 3 ЕҪ2.9.

Boston
7 ЕҪ8.0. 11 ЕҪ7.6. 7 ЕҪ7.1. 6 ЕҪ7.0.
бҺҸ 6 ЕҪ5.1. 1 ЕҪ3.2.

Cleveland
9 ЕҪ9.2. 9 ЕҪ8.8. 8 ЕҪ8.4. 7 ЕҪ8.3. 7 ЕҪ7.9.
бҺҸ 7 ЕҪ4.4.

Baltimore
11 ЕҪ10.8. 9 ЕҪ10.5. 12 ЕҪ10.2. 10 ЕҪ10.1. 12 ЕҪ9.8. 6 ЕҪ8.6.
бҺҸ

aValues in parentheses represent the fit of the BradleyбҺҗTerry model. Source: American League Red Book, 1988 ЕҪSt. Louis, MO: Sporting News Publishing Co..

10.6.2 Home Team Advantage in Baseball

Table 10.10 shows results of the 1987 season for the seven baseball teams in

the Eastern Division of the American League. For instance, of games

between Boston and New York, Boston won 7 and New York won 6. Table

10.10 shows the population of regular-season games. We regard this as a

sample estimate of a conceptual distribution representing the long-run per-

Еҫ / formance of teams as constituted in 1987.

We fitted the BradleyбҺҗTerry model as a logit model for

7 2

s 21 indepen-

dent binomial samples, using an appropriate model matrix and no intercept ЕҪe.g., for SAS, see Table A.19.. The model fits adequately ЕҪG2 s 15.7,
df s 15.. Table 10.10 contains the fitted values Г„вҗ®ЛҶab4. Table 10.11 displays

the sample proportion of games each team won and the model estimates of
Г„ вҗӨЛҶa4 ЕҪsetting вҗӨЛҶ7 s 0. and Г„expЕҪвҗӨЛҶa.4 wsetting ГқaexpЕҪвҗӨЛҶa. s 1x. When Boston

played New York, the estimated probability that Boston won is

вҢёЛҶ 54 s expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ5 . expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ5 . q expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ4 . s 0.46.

The standard error of each вҗӨЛҶa and of each вҗӨЛҶa y вҗӨЛҶb is about 0.3, so not
much evidence exists of a difference among the top five teams.

TABLE 10.11
Team
Milwaukee Detroit Toronto New York Boston Cleveland Baltimore

Results of Fitting BradleyвҖ“Terry Models to Baseball Data

Winning Percentage

вҗӨЛҶi
ЕҪ10.31.

expЕҪвҗӨЛҶi.
ЕҪ10.31.

expЕҪвҗӨЛҶi.
ЕҪ10.32.

64.1

1.58

0.218

0.220

60.2

1.44

0.189

0.190

56.4

1.29

0.164

0.164

55.1

1.25

0.158

0.157

51.3

1.11

0.136

0.137

39.7

0.68

0.089

0.088

23.1

0.00

0.045

0.044

438

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

TABLE 10.12 Wins r Losses by Home and Away Team, 1987

Away Team

Home Team Milwaukee Detroit Toronto New York Boston Cleveland Baltimore

Milwaukee

бҺҸ

4-3

4-2

4-3

6-1

4-2

6-0

Detroit

3-3

бҺҸ

4-2

4-3

6-0

6-1

4-3

Toronto

2-5

4-3

бҺҸ

2-4

4-3

4-2

6-0

New York

3-3

5-1

2-5

бҺҸ

4-3

4-2

6-1

Boston

5-1

2-5

3-3

4-2

бҺҸ

5-2

6-0

Cleveland

2-5

3-3

3-4

4-3

4-2

бҺҸ

2-4

Baltimore

2-5

1-5

1-6

2-4

1-6

3-4

бҺҸ

Source: American League Red Book, 1988 ЕҪSt. Louis, MO: Sporting News Publishing Co...

This model does not recognize which team is the home team. Most sports
have a home field advantage: A team is more likely to win when it plays at its
home city. Table 10.12 contains results for the 1987 season according to the ЕҪhome team, away team. classification. For instance, when Boston was the
home team, it beat New York 4 times and lost 2 times; when New York was the home team, it beat Boston 4 times and lost 3 times. Now for all a / b, let вҢё*ab denote the probability that team a beats team b, when a is the home team. Consider logit model

log вҢё*ab s вҗЈ q ЕҪ вҗӨa y вҗӨb . .
1 y вҢё*ab

ЕҪ 10 .32.

When вҗЈ ) 0, a home field advantage exists. The home team of two evenly matched teams has probability expЕҪвҗЈ.rw1 q expЕҪвҗЈ.x of winning.
For Table 10.12, model ЕҪ10.32. describes 42 binomial distributions with 7
parameters. It has G2 s 38.6 ЕҪdf s 35.. Table 10.11 displays Г„expЕҪвҗӨЛҶa.4, which
are similar to those obtained previously. The estimate of the home-field
parameter is вҗЈЛҶ s 0.302. For two evenly matched teams, the home team had
estimated probability 0.575 of winning. When Boston played New York, the
estimated probability of a Boston win was 0.54 at Boston and 0.39 at New
York. Model ЕҪ10.32. is a useful generalization of the BradleyбҺҗTerry model
whenever an order effect exists. For instance, in pairwise taste evaluations,
the product tasted first may have a slight advantage.

10.6.3 BradleyвҖ“Terry Model and Quasi-symmetry Fienberg and Larntz ЕҪ1976. showed that the BradleyбҺҗTerry model is a logit formulation of the quasi-symmetry model ЕҪ10.19.. For quasi-symmetry, given that an observation is in cell ЕҪ a, b. or ЕҪ b, a., the logit of the conditional

MARGINAL AND QUASI-SYMMETRY MODELS FOR MATCHED SETS

439

probability of cell ЕҪ a, b. equals

log s вҗ®ab ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯaX q вҗӯbY q вҗӯab X Y . y ЕҪ вҗӯ q вҗӯbX q вҗӯaY q вҗӯba X Y .
вҗ®ba
s ЕҪ вҗӯaX y вҗӯaY . y ЕҪ вҗӯbX y вҗӯbY . s вҗӨa y вҗӨb ,

where

вҗӨa s вҗӯaX

y вҗӯYa.

Estimates

Г„

вҗӯЛҶ

X a

4

and

Г„ вҗӯЛҶYa 4

for

quasi-symmetry

yield

Г„ вҗӨЛҶa4

for the BradleyбҺҗTerry model.

10.6.4 Extensions to Ties and Ordinal Evaluations
The BradleyбҺҗTerry model extends to ordinal comparisons, such as the evaluation scale ЕҪmuch better, slightly better, the same, slightly worse, much worse. in comparing two products. With cumulative logits and an I-category evaluation scale, let Yab denote the response for a comparison of a with b. The model is
logit P ЕҪ Yab F j . s вҗЈj q ЕҪ вҗӨa y вҗӨb . .
Since PЕҪYab F j. s PЕҪYba ) I y j. s 1 y PЕҪYba F I y j., it follows that logitw PЕҪYab F jx s y logitw PЕҪYba F I y j.x. Thus, necessarily, вҗЈj s yвҗЈIyj .
The most common ordered preference scale is ЕҪwin, tie, lose.. Then, вҗЈ1 s yвҗЈ2.

10.7 MARGINAL AND QUASI-SYMMETRY MODELS FOR MATCHED SETS*
Methods for matched pairs extend to matched sets. Here we present mainly the loglinear modeling approach; in Chapters 11 and 12 we present extensions of the marginal and conditional logit modeling approaches.
10.7.1 Marginal Homogeneity, Complete Symmetry, and Quasi-symmetry Let ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , YT . denote the T responses in each matched set. With I response categories, a contingency table with I T cells summarizes the possible outcomes. Let i s ЕҪi1, . . . , iT . denote the cell having Yt s it, t s 1, . . . , T. Let вҗІ i s PЕҪYt s it , t s 1, . . . , T ., and let вҗ®i s nвҗІ i. Then
P ЕҪ Yt s j . s вҗІqРё Рё РёqjqРё Рё Рёq,
where the j subscript is in position t, and Г„ PЕҪYt s j., j s 1, . . . , I4 is the marginal distribution for Yt.

440

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

This T-way table satisfies marginal homogeneity if
P ЕҪ Y1 s j . s P ЕҪ Y2 s j . s РёРёРё s P ЕҪ YT s j . for j s 1, . . . , I.

It satisfies complete symmetry if

вҗІi s вҗІj

for any permutation j s ЕҪ j1, . . . , jT . of i s ЕҪi1, . . . , iT .. Complete symmetry implies marginal homogeneity, but the converse does not hold except when
T s I s 2.
Complete symmetry is a loglinear model. One representation is

log вҗ®i s вҗӯab . . . m ,

where a is the minimum of ЕҪi1, . . . , iT ., b is the next smallest, . . . , and m is the maximum. In a three-way table, for instance, log вҗ®122 s log вҗ®212 s log вҗ®221 s вҗӯ122 . The number of Г„ вҗӯab . . . m4 parameters is the number of ways

Еҫ / of selecting T out of I items with replacement, which is Еҫ / residual df s I T y I q T y 1 ЕҪHaberman 1978, p. 518..
T
An I T table satisfies quasi-symmetry if

I q T y 1 T . Thus,

log вҗ®i s вҗӯ1i1 q вҗӯ2 i2 q РёРёРё qвҗӯT iT q вҗӯab . . . m

ЕҪ 10 .33.

where вҗӯab . . . m is defined as in the complete symmetry model. It has symmetric association and higher-order interaction terms, but permits each singlefactor marginal distribution to have its own parameters. Identifiability requires constraints such as вҗӯtI s 0 for each t. One set of main-effect terms is redundant ЕҪProblem 10.31.. This model has ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪT y 1. more parameters than complete symmetry. It is fitted using iterative methods.
For ordinal responses, a simpler model with quantitative main effects uses ordered scores Г„ua4. The ordinal quasi-symmetry model is
log вҗ®i s вҗӨ1 ui1 q вҗӨ2 ui2 q РёРёРё qвҗӨT uiT q вҗӯab . . . m

where one can set вҗӨT s 0. Complete symmetry is the special case вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨT .
When quasi-symmetry ЕҪ10.33. or ordinal quasi-symmetry holds, marginal homogeneity is equivalent to complete symmetry. Marginal heterogeneity occurs if quasi-symmetry ЕҪQS. holds but complete symmetry ЕҪS. does not. The statistic
G2 ЕҪS < QS. s G2 ЕҪS. y G2 ЕҪQS.

MARGINAL AND QUASI-SYMMETRY MODELS FOR MATCHED SETS

441

tests marginal homogeneity. Under complete symmetry, it is asymptotically chi-squared with df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪT y 1.. The corresponding test for the ordinal quasi-symmetry model has df s ЕҪT y 1..

10.7.2 Attitudes toward Legalized Abortion Example
Refer to Table 10.13. Subjects indicated whether they support legalized abortion in three situations: ЕҪ1. if the family has a very low income and cannot afford any more children, ЕҪ2. when the woman is not married and does not want to marry the man, and ЕҪ3. when the woman wants it for any reason. The table also classifies subjects by gender, resulting in a 24 table.
Let вҗ®ghi j denote the expected frequency for gender g ЕҪ1 s female; 0 s male. with response sequence ЕҪ h, i, j. for the three questions. Consider the model
log вҗ®g hi j s вҗӨ g q вҗӯabc ,
where the interaction term is вҗӯ111 when ЕҪ h, i, j. s ЕҪ1, 1, 1., вҗӯ112 when ЕҪ h, i, j. s ЕҪ1, 1, 2. or ЕҪ1, 2, 1. or ЕҪ2, 1, 1., вҗӯ122 when ЕҪ h, i, j. s ЕҪ1, 2, 2. or ЕҪ2, 1, 2. or ЕҪ2, 2, 1., and вҗӯ222 when ЕҪ h, i, j. s ЕҪ2, 2, 2.. This model implies the same complete symmetry pattern of probabilities for each gender. Its fit has G2 s 39.2 with df s 11.
Adding main-effect terms for the three issues implies the same quasi-symmetric pattern for each gender. It fits much better, having G2 s 10.2 with df s 9. Thus, it seems plausible to assume a symmetric association structure. In fact, the loglinear model with only two-factor association terms has fitted log odds ratios of 3.2 for items 1 and 2, 2.6 for items 1 and 3, and 3.3 for items 2 and 3.
One can test marginal homogeneity, given gender, by the likelihood-ratio statistic 39.2 y 10.2 s 29.0, with df s 2. An analysis of the main-effect terms in the quasi-symmetry model shows greater support for legalized abortion when the family has a low income and cannot afford any more children than in the other two instances.

TABLE 10.13 Support for Legalizing Abortion in Three Situations, by Gender

Gender

ЕҪ1, 1, 1.

Sequence of Responses on the Three Itemsa ЕҪ1, 1, 2. ЕҪ2, 1, 1. ЕҪ2, 1, 2. ЕҪ1, 2, 1. ЕҪ1, 2, 2. ЕҪ2, 2, 1.

ЕҪ2, 2, 2.

Male

342

26

6

21

11

32

19

356

Female 440

25

14

18

14

47

22

457

aItems are ЕҪ1. if the family has a very low income and cannot afford anymore children, ЕҪ2. when the woman is not married and does not want to marry the man, and ЕҪ3. when the woman wants it for any reason. 1, yes; 2, no.

Source: Data from 1994 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

442

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

10.7.3 Types of Marginal Symmetry
A general type of symmetry for I T tables has marginal homogeneity and complete symmetry as special cases. For an I T table, PЕҪYt1 s j1, . . . , Yth s jh., where h is between 1 and T, is a h-dimensional marginal probability, h s 1 giving single-variable marginal probabilities. There is hth-order marginal symmetry if for all h-tuples j s ЕҪ j1, . . . , jh., this probability is the same for each permutation of j and for all combinations t s ЕҪt1, . . . , th. of h of the T responses.
For h s 1, first-order marginal symmetry is marginal homogeneity. Second-order marginal symmetry occurs if for all t and u, PЕҪYt s a, Yu s b. is the same and the equality holds for all pairs of outcomes ЕҪ a, b.. In other words, the two-way marginal tables exhibit symmetry, and they are identical. T th-order marginal symmetry in an I T table is complete symmetry.
When hth-order symmetry holds, ith-order marginal symmetry holds for any i - h. For instance, complete symmetry implies second-order marginal symmetry, which itself implies marginal homogeneity. Although this hierarchy is mathematically attractive, the higher-order symmetries are usually too restrictive to fit well in practice.

10.7.4 Marginal Models: Multiway Tables
In practice, usually the form of the joint distribution is of secondary interest. Research questions pertain instead to the marginal distributions. The marginal models of Section 10.3 for matched pairs extend to matched sets. For instance, with ordinal classifications, a cumulative logit model is
logit P ЕҪ Yt F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨt , j s 1, . . . , I y 1, t s 1, . . . , T . ЕҪ10.34.
In the next chapter we study marginal models in more general contexts, extending the analyses of this chapter to incorporate matched sets and explanatory variables.

NOTES

Section 10.1: Comparing Dependent Proportions

10.1.

Miettinen ЕҪ1969. generalized the McNemar test to caseбҺҗcontrol sets having several controls per case. The Table 10.2 representation is then useful. Each of n matched sets forms a stratum of a 2 = 2 = n table with one observation in column 1 ЕҪthe case. and several observations in column 2 ЕҪthe controls..
Altham ЕҪ1971. and Ghosh et al. ЕҪ2000. presented Bayesian analyses for binary matched pairs. Copas ЕҪ1973., Gart ЕҪ1969., Kenward and Jones ЕҪ1994., and Miettinen ЕҪ1969. studied generalizations of matched-pairs designs. With some approaches ЕҪGhosh et al. 2000; Liang and Zeger 1988; Suissa and Shuster 1991., inferences about marginal homogeneity also use the main-diagonal observations.

NOTES

443

Section 10.4: Symmetry, Quasi-symmetry, and Quasi-independence

10.2. 10.3.

For other discussion of quasi-symmetry, see Darroch ЕҪ1981. and McCullagh ЕҪ1982.. The term quasi-independence originated in Goodman ЕҪ1968.. A more general definition of it is вҗІab s вҗЈa вҗӨb for some fixed set of cells. See Caussinus ЕҪ1966., Fienberg ЕҪ1970b, 1972., and Goodman ЕҪ1968.. Caussinus used the concept to analyze tables that deleted a certain set of cells from consideration, and Goodman used it in earlier analyses of social mobility. Altham ЕҪ1975. used it with triangular tables, for which observations occur only above or only below the main diagonal. Stigler ЕҪ1999, Chap. 19. summarized early uses, including Karl PearsonвҖҷs handling in 1913 of a triangular array. Booth and Butler ЕҪ1999. and Smith et al. ЕҪ1996. discussed exact tests for square-table models.
The effect вҗӨ in ordinal quasi-symmetry relates to the occasion effect in a subjectspecific adjacent-categories-logit model ЕҪAgresti 1993.. Conditional symmetry is a special case of diagonals-parameter symmetry,

logЕҪвҗІabrвҗІ b a . s вҗ¶ bya , a - b.

See Goodman ЕҪ1979b, 1985. and Hout et al. ЕҪ1987..
10.4. In some applications a table is a priori symmetric or independent, but one can observe only the pair ЕҪi, j. rather than their order, thus leading to an upper-triangular table. See Khamis ЕҪ1983. for examples and ML fitting of models for such three-way tables that are symmetric within layers.

Section 10.5: Measuring Agreement between ObserВ©ers
10.5. Kappa and weighted kappa relate to the intraclass correlation, a measure of interrater reliability for interval scales ЕҪFleiss 1981; Fleiss and Cohen 1973; Kraemer 1979.. Banerjee et al. ЕҪ1999. and Fleiss ЕҪ1981, Chap. 13. reviewed kappa and its generalizations. See Becker and Agresti ЕҪ1992., Goodman ЕҪ1979b., Tanner and Young ЕҪ1985., and Problem 10.41 for examples of modeling agreement with loglinear models. Darroch and McCloud ЕҪ1986. showed that quasi-symmetry has an important role in agreement modeling.

Section 10.6: BradleyвҖ“Terry Model for Paired Preferences
10.6. Zermelo ЕҪ1929. proposed a model that is equivalent to the BradleyбҺҗTerry model. Luce ЕҪ1959. provided an axiomatic basis for it. Mosteller ЕҪ1951. and Thurstone ЕҪ1927. proposed an analogous model with probit link. An interesting interview of Ralph Bradley by M. Hollander ЕҪStat. Sci. 16: 75бҺҗ100, 2001. discussed food-tasting applications that motivated its development. For extensions, see Bradley ЕҪ1976.. Fienberg and Larntz ЕҪ1976. and Imrey et al. ЕҪ1976. related it to quasi-independence. Dittrich et al. ЕҪ1998. allowed covariates. Matthews and Morris ЕҪ1995. gave an application with a
factorial design, ties, and allowance for dependence among judgments. BВЁockenholt
and Dillon ЕҪ1997. modeled dependence with ordinal preferences. David ЕҪ1988. and Imrey ЕҪ1998. surveyed paired preference methods.

444

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

TABLE 10.14 Data for Problem 10.1

Suicide

Let Patient Die

Yes

No

Yes

1097

90

No

203

435

Source: 1994 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

PROBLEMS
Applications
10.1 Table 10.14 shows results when subjects were asked вҖҳвҖҳDo you think a person has the right to end his or her own life if this person has an incurable disease?вҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳWhen a person has a disease that cannot be cured, do you think doctors should be allowed to end the patientвҖҷs life by some painless means if the patient and his family request it?вҖҷвҖҷ The table refers to these variables as вҖҳвҖҳsuicideвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳlet patient die.вҖҷвҖҷ a. Compare the marginal proportions using a confidence interval. b. Perform McNemarвҖҷs test, and interpret. c. Find the conditional ML estimate of вҗӨ for model ЕҪ10.8.. Interpret.
10.2 Refer to Table 8.16 and Problem 8.1. Treat the data as matched pairs on opinion, stratified by gender. Testing independence for the 2 = 2 table using entries ЕҪ6, 160. in row 1 and ЕҪ11, 181. in row 2 tests equality of вҗӨ for logit model ЕҪ10.8. for each gender. Explain why.
10.3 A crossover experiment with 100 subjects compares two drugs for treating migraine headaches. The response scale is success ЕҪ1. or failure ЕҪ0.. Half the study subjects, randomly selected, used drug A the first time they had a headache and drug B the next time. For them, 6 had outcomes ЕҪ1, 1. for ЕҪ A, B., 25 had outcomes ЕҪ1, 0., 10 had outcomes ЕҪ0, 1., and 9 had outcomes ЕҪ0, 0.. For the 50 subjects who took the drugs in the reverse order, 10 were ЕҪ1, 1. for ЕҪ A, B., 20 were ЕҪ1, 0., 12 were ЕҪ0, 1., and 8 were ЕҪ0, 0.. a. Ignoring treatment order, compare the success probabilities for the two drugs. Interpret. b. McNemarвҖҷs test uses only the pairs of outcomes that differ. For this study, Table 10.15 shows such data from both treatment orders. Testing independence for this table tests whether success rates are identical for the treatments ЕҪGart 1969.. Explain why. Analyze these data, and interpret.

PROBLEMS

445

TABLE 10.15
Treatment Order
A, then B B, then A

Data for Problem 10.3

Treatment That Is Better

First

Second

25

10

12

20

10.4 A caseбҺҗcontrol study has 8 pairs of subjects. The cases have colon cancer, and the controls are matched with the cases on gender and age. A possible explanatory variable is the extent of red meat in a subjectвҖҷs diet, measured as вҖҳвҖҳ1 s highвҖҷвҖҷ or вҖҳвҖҳ0 s low.вҖҷвҖҷ The ЕҪcase, control. observations on this were ЕҪ1, 1. for 3 pairs, ЕҪ0, 0. for 1 pair, ЕҪ1, 0. for 3 pairs, and ЕҪ0, 1. for 1 pair. a. Cross-classify the 8 pairs in terms of diet ЕҪ1 or 0. for the case against diet ЕҪ1 or 0. for the control. Call this Table A. Display the 2 = 2 = 8 table with eight partial tables relating diet ЕҪ1 or 0. to response ЕҪcase or control. for the 8 pairs. Call this Table B. b. Calculate the McNemar z 2 for Table A and the CMH statistic for Table B. Compare. c. Show that the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimate of a common odds ratio for Table B is identical to n12rn21 for Table A. d. For Table B with pairs deleted in which the case and the control had the same diet, show that the CMH statistic and the MantelбҺҗHaenszel odds ratio estimate do not change.
e. This sample size is small for large-sample tests. Use the binomial distribution with Table A to find the exact P-value for testing marginal homogeneity against the alternative hypothesis of a higher incidence of colon cancer for the high-red-meat diet.
10.5 Each week Variety magazine summarizes reviews of new movies by critics in several cities. Each review is categorized as pro, con, or mixed, according to whether the overall evaluation is positive, negative, or a mixture of the two. Table 10.16 summarizes the ratings from

TABLE 10.16 Data for Problem 10.5

Siskel

Ebert

Con

Mixed

Pro

Con

24

8

13

Mixed

8

13

11

Pro

10

9

64

Source: A. Agresti and L. Winner, CHANCE 10: 10бҺҗ14 ЕҪ1997., reprinted with permission, copyright 1997 by the American Statistical Association.

446

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

April 1995 through September 1996 for Chicago film critics Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert.
a. Fit the symmetry model, quasi-independence model, and quasisymmetry model. Interpret.
b. Test marginal homogeneity using models, and interpret.
c. Analyze these data using agreement models andror measures of agreement.

10.6 Refer to Table 10.5. Fit the ordinal quasi-symmetry model using
u1 s 1 and u4 s 4 and picking u2 and u3 that are unequally spaced but represent sensible choices. Compare results and interpretations to
those in Sections 10.3.2 and 10.4.7.

10.7 Refer to all four items in Table 8.19.
a. Fit the complete symmetry and quasi-symmetry models. Test marginal homogeneity. Interpret.
b. Fit the ordinal quasi-symmetry model. Test marginal homogeneity. Interpret the effects.

10.8 Table 10.17 shows subjectsвҖҷ purchase choice of instant decaffeinated coffee at two times.
a. Fit the symmetry model and use residuals to analyze changes.
b. Test marginal homogeneity. Show that the small P-value reflects a decrease in the proportion choosing High Point and an increase in the proportion choosing Sanka, with no evidence of change for the other coffees.
c. Show that quasi-independence has G2 s 13.8 ЕҪdf s 11.. Interpret, and suggest other analyses that might be useful.

TABLE 10.17 Data for Problem 10.8

First Purchase

High Point

Second Purchase

TasterвҖҷs Choice

Sanka

Nescafe

Brim

High Point

93

17

44

7

10

TasterвҖҷs Choice

9

46

11

0

9

Sanka

17

11

155

9

12

Nescafe

6

4

9

15

2

Brim

10

4

12

2

27

Source: Based on data from R. Grover and V. Srinivasan, J. Market. Res. 24: 139бҺҗ153 ЕҪ1987.. Reprinted with permission from the American Marketing Association.

PROBLEMS

447

TABLE 10.18 Data for Problem 10.9

FatherвҖҷs

Status

1

SonвҖҷs Status

2

3

4

5

Total

1

50

45

8

18

8

129

2

28

174

84

154

55

495

3

11

78

110

223

96

518

4

14

150

185

714

447

1510

5

3

42

72

320

411

848

Total

106

489

459

1429

1017

3500

Source: Reprinted with permission from D. V. Glass ЕҪed., Social Mobility in Britain, Glencoe, IL: Free Press ЕҪ1954..

10.9 Table 10.18 relates fatherвҖҷs and sonвҖҷs occupational status for a British sample. Analyze these data, using models of ЕҪa. symmetry, ЕҪb. quasisymmetry, ЕҪc. ordinal quasi-symmetry, ЕҪd. conditional symmetry, ЕҪe. marginal homogeneity, ЕҪf. quasi-independence, and ЕҪg. quasi-uniform association. Interpret using their fit and lack of fit.

10.10 For Table 10.18, use kappa to describe agreement. Interpret.

10.11

Table 10.19 displays multiple sclerosis diagnoses for two neurologists who classified patients in two sites, Winnipeg and New Orleans. The diagnostic classes are ЕҪ1. certain; ЕҪ2. probable; ЕҪ3. possible; and ЕҪ4. doubtful, unlikely, or definitely not. For the New Orleans patients, study the agreement using ЕҪa. the independence model and residuals, ЕҪb. more complex models, and ЕҪc. kappa. Interpret each.

TABLE 10.19 Data for Problem 10.11

New Orleans Neurologist

Winnipeg Neurologist

Winnipeg Patients

New Orleans Patients

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

38

5

2

33

11

3

10

14

4

3

7

Source: J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, from the Biometric Society.

0

1

5

3

0

3

5

6

2

3

10

1

Biometrics 33: 159бҺҗ174 ЕҪ1977..

3

0

0

11

4

0

13

3

4

2

4

14

Reprinted with permission

448

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

10.12 For Problem 10.11, construct a model that describes agreement between neurologists for the two sites simultaneously.

10.13

Calculate kappa for a 4 = 4 table having nii s 5 all i, ni, iq1 s 15, i s 1, 2, 3, n41 s 15, and ni j s 0 otherwise. Explain why strong association does not imply strong agreement.

10.14

Refer to Table 10.8. Based on the reported standardized residuals, explain why the linear-by-linear association model ЕҪ9.6. might fit well. Fit it and describe the association.

10.15

In 1990, a sample of psychology graduate students at the University of Florida made blind, pairwise preference tests of three cola drinks. For 49 comparisons of Coke and Pepsi, Coke was preferred 29 times. For 47 comparisons of Classic Coke and Pepsi, Classic Coke was preferred 19 times. For 50 comparisons of Coke and Classic Coke, Coke was preferred 31 times. Comparisons resulting in ties are not reported.
a. Fit the BradleyбҺҗTerry model, analyze the quality of fit, and rank the drinks. Is there sufficient evidence to conclude a preference for one drink?
b. Estimate the probability that Coke is preferred to Pepsi, using the model, and compare to the sample proportion.

10.16

Table 10.20 refers to journal citations among four statistics journals during 1987бҺҗ1989. The more often articles in a particular journal are cited, the more prestige that journal accrues. For citations involving pair A and B, view it as a victory for A if it is cited by B and a defeat for A if it cites B. Fit the BradleyбҺҗTerry model. Interpret the fit, and give a prestige ranking of the journals. For citations involving Commun. Stat. and JRSS-B, estimate the probability that the Commun. Stat. article cites the JRSS-B article.

TABLE 10.20 Data for Problem 10.16

Citing Journal

Biometrika

Cited Journal Commun. Stat.

JASA

JRSS-B

Biometrika

714

Commun. Stat.

730

JASA

498

JRSS-B

221

33

320

284

425

813

276

68

1072

325

17

142

188

Source: Stigler ЕҪ1994.. Reprinted with permission from the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.

PROBLEMS

TABLE 10.21
Winner Seles Graf Sabatini Navratilova Sanchez

Data for Problem 10.17

Loser

Seles

Graf

Sabatini

бҺҸ

2

1

3

бҺҸ

6

0

3

бҺҸ

3

0

2

0

1

2

Navratilova
3 3 1 бҺҸ 1

449
Sanchez 2 7 3 3 бҺҸ

10.17

Table 10.21 refers to matches for several women tennis players during 1989 and 1990. a. Fit the BradleyбҺҗTerry model. Interpret, and rank the players.
b. Estimate the probability of Seles beating Graf. Compare the model estimate to the sample proportion. Construct a 90% confidence interval for the probability.
c. Which pairs of players are significantly different according to a 80% simultaneous Bonferroni comparison?

10.18 Refer to Problem 3.3 on basketball free-throw shooting. Analyze these data.

10.19 Refer to Table 2.12 and Problem 2.19. Using models, describe the relationship between husbandвҖҷs and wifeвҖҷs sexual fun.

10.20

Refer to Table 8.19. The two-way table relating responses for the environment ЕҪas rows. and cities ЕҪas columns. has cell counts, by row, ЕҪ108, 179, 157 r 21, 55, 52 r 5, 6, 24.. Analyze these data.

Theory and Methods

10.21 10.22

Explain the following analogy: McNemarвҖҷs test is to binary data as the paired difference t test is to normally distributed data.
For a 2 = 2 table, derive covЕҪ pq1, p1q., and show that varw'n ЕҪ pq1 y
p1q.x equals ЕҪ10.1..

10.23

Refer to the subject-specific model ЕҪ10.8. for binary matched pairs. a. Show that expЕҪвҗӨ. is a conditional odds ratio between observation
and outcome. Explain the distinction between it and the odds ratio expЕҪвҗӨ. for model ЕҪ10.6..

450

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

b. Using the conditional distribution ЕҪ10.9., show that вҗӨЛҶ s
logЕҪ n21rn12 .. c. For a random sample of n pairs, explain why

1n

1

EЕҪ n21rn. s Гқ

expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .
.

n is1 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi . 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .

6 6 6

Similarily, state EЕҪ n12rn.. Usipng their ratio for fixed n and as n Пұ, explain why n21rn12 expЕҪвҗӨ.. ЕҪ Hint: Apply the law of large numbers due to A. A. Markov for independent but not identically distributed random variables, or use ChebyshevвҖҷs inequality.. d. Show that the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimator ЕҪ6.7. of a common odds
ratio in the 2 = 2 = n form of the data simplifies to expЕҪвҗӨЛҶ. s
n21rn12 .
e. Use the delta method to show ЕҪ10.10. for the SE of вҗӨЛҶ.
f. For a table of the form shown in Table 10.2, show that the CMH statistic ЕҪ6.6. is algebraically identical to the McNemar statistic ЕҪ n21 y n12 .2rЕҪ n21 q n12 . for tables of Table 10.1 type.

10.24

Refer to Problem 10.23. Unlike the conditional ML estimator of вҗӨ, the unconditional ML estimator is inconsistent ЕҪAndersen 1980, pp. 244бҺҗ245; first shown by him in 1973.. Show this as follows:
a. Assuming independence of responses for different subjects and different observations by the same subject, find the log likelihood. Show that the likelihood equations are yqt s Гқi PЕҪYit s 1. and yiqs Гқt PЕҪYit s 1..
b. Substituting expЕҪвҗЈi.rw1 q expЕҪвҗЈi.x q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨ .rw1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q
вҗӨ .x in the second likelihood equation, show that вҗЈЛҶi s yПұ for the n22 subjects with yiqs 0, вҗЈЛҶi s Пұ for the n11 subjects with yiqs 2, and вҗЈЛҶi s yвҗӨЛҶr2 for the n21 q n12 subjects with yiqs 1.
c. By breaking Гқi PЕҪYit s 1. into components for the sets of subjects having yiqs 0, yiqs 2, and yiqs 1, show that the first likelihood equation is, for t s 1, yq1 s n22ЕҪ0. q n11ЕҪ1. q ЕҪ n21 q
n12 .expЕҪyвҗӨЛҶr2.rw1 q expЕҪyвҗӨЛҶr2.x. Explain why yq1 s n11 q n12 , and solve the first likelihood equation to show pthat вҗӨЛҶ s 2 logЕҪ n21rn12 .. Hence, as a result of Problem 10.23, вҗӨЛҶ 2 вҗӨ.

10.25

Consider marginal model ЕҪ10.6. when Y1 and Y2 are independent and conditional model ЕҪ10.8. when Г„вҗЈi4 are identical. Explain why they are equivalent.

PROBLEMS

451

10.26

Let вҗӨЛҶM s logЕҪ pq1 p2qrpq2 p1q. refer to marginal model ЕҪ10.6. and вҗӨЛҶC s logЕҪ n21rn12 . to conditional model ЕҪ10.8.. Using the delta
method, show that the asymptotic variance of 'n ЕҪвҗӨЛҶM y вҗӨM . is

ЕҪ вҗІ 1qвҗІ 2q . y1 q ЕҪ вҗІq1вҗІq2 . y1 y 2ЕҪ вҗІ 11вҗІ 22 y вҗІ 12вҗІ 21 . rЕҪ вҗІ 1qвҗІ 2qвҗІq1вҗІq2 . .

Under the independence condition of the previous problem, вҗӨM s вҗӨC. In that case, show that the asymptotic variances satisfy
var 'n ЕҪвҗӨЛҶM . s ЕҪвҗІ 1qвҗІ 2q . y1 q ЕҪвҗІq1вҗІq2 . y1
F ЕҪ вҗІ 1qвҗІq2 . y1 q ЕҪ вҗІq1вҗІ 2q . y1
s вҗІ 12 y1 q вҗІ 21 y1 s var 'n ЕҪвҗӨЛҶC .

10.27

Refer to model ЕҪ10.12. for a matched-pairs study. For the conditional ML approach, show that the conditional distribution satisfies ЕҪ10.13.
and does not depend on вҗӨ when Si s 0 or 2. Show what happens to вҗӨj in the conditional distribution for a predictor for which x ji1 s x ji2 all i.

10.28

Consider model ЕҪ10.12. for a study with matched sets of T observations rather than matched pairs. Explain how ЕҪ10.13. generalizes and construct the form of the conditional likelihood.

10.29 Give an example illustrating that when I ) 2, marginal homogeneity does not imply symmetry.

10.30

Derive the likelihood equations and residual df for ЕҪa. symmetry, ЕҪb. quasi-symmetry, ЕҪc. quasi-independence, and ЕҪd. ordinal quasisymmetry.

10.31 10.32

For the quasi-symmetry model ЕҪ10.19., let вҗӯa s вҗӯaX y вҗӯYa. Show that one can express it equivalently as log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯa q вҗӯ*ab, with вҗӯ*ab s вҗӯ*ba. Hence, one needs only one set of main-effect parameters. Show that quasi-symmetry is equivalent ЕҪCaussinus 1966. to

ЕҪвҗІabвҗІ bcвҗІca. rЕҪ вҗІ baвҗІcbвҗІac . s 1 all a, b, and c.

10.33 Derive the covariance matrix ЕҪ10.16. for the difference vector d.

452

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

10.34 10.35

Construct the loglinear model satisfying both marginal homogeneity
and statistical independence. Show that вҗІЛҶab s ЕҪ pqa q paq.ЕҪ pqb q
pbq.r4 and residual df s IЕҪ I y 1..
Consider the conditional symmetry ЕҪCS. model ЕҪ10.28.. a. Show that it has the loglinear representation

log вҗ®ab s вҗӯmin ЕҪ a, b., max ЕҪ a, b. q вҗ¶ I ЕҪ a - b. ,

where IЕҪРё. is an indicator ЕҪsee also Bishop et al. 1975, pp. 285бҺҗ286.. b. Show that the likelihood equations are

вҗ®ЛҶ ab q вҗ®ЛҶ b a s nab q nb a

for all a F b,

ГқГқ вҗ®ЛҶab s ГқГқ nab .

a-b

a-b

c. Show that вҗ¶ЛҶ s logwЕҪГқГқa- b nab.rЕҪГқГқa) b nab.x, вҗ®ЛҶaa s naa, a s 1, . . . , I, вҗ®ЛҶab s exp wЛҶвҗ¶ IЕҪ a - b.xЕҪ nab q nba.rwexp ЕҪвҗ¶ЛҶ. q 1x for a / b.
d. Show that the estimated asymptotic variance of ЛҶвҗ¶ is

Еҫ / Еҫ / y1
ГқГқ nab q
a-b

y1
ГқГқ nab .
a)b

e. Show that residual df s ЕҪ I q 1.ЕҪ I y 2.r2. f. Show that conditional symmetry q marginal homogeneity s
symmetry. Explain why G2ЕҪS < CS. tests marginal homogeneity ЕҪdf s 1.. When the model holds G2ЕҪS < CS. is more powerful asymptotically than G2ЕҪS < QS.. Why?

10.36 Identify loglinear models that correspond to the logit models, for a - b, logЕҪвҗІabrвҗІ ba. s ЕҪa. 0, ЕҪb. вҗ¶ , ЕҪc. вҗЈa y вҗЈb, and ЕҪd. вҗӨ ЕҪ b y a..
10.37 A nonmodel-based ordinal measure of marginal heterogeneity is

вҢ¬ЛҶ s ГқГқ paqpqb y ГқГқ paqpqb .

a-b

a)b

Show that вҢ¬ЛҶ estimates вҢ¬ s PЕҪY1 ) Y2 . y PЕҪY2 ) Y1., where Y1 has
distribution Г„вҗІaq4 and Y2 is independent from Г„вҗІqb4. Show that marginal homogeneity implies that вҢ¬ s 0. Show that the estimated

PROBLEMS

453

10.38

asymptotic variance of вҢ¬ЛҶ is

Еҫ /2

Гқ

Гқ

вҗҫЛҶ2
ab

pab

y

Гқ Гқ вҗҫЛҶab pab

n,

ab

ab

where вҗҫЛҶab s FЛҶb1 q FЛҶby1,1 y FЛҶa2 y FЛҶay1,2 with FЛҶa1 s ЕҪ p1qq РёРёРё qpaq. and FЛҶa2 s ЕҪ pq1 q РёРёРё qpqa . ЕҪAgresti 1984, pp. 208бҺҗ209..

For ordered scores Г„ua4, let y1 s Гқaua paq and y2 s Гқaua pqa. Show that marginal homogeneity implies that EЕҪY1. s EЕҪY2 . and

Гқ Гқ ЕҪ ua y ub . 2 pab y ЕҪ y1 y y2 .2 n.
ab
estimates varЕҪY1 y Y2 .. Construct a test of marginal homogeneity ЕҪBhapkar 1968..

10.39

ВҪ Consider the multiplicative model for a square table,

вҗІab s

вҗЈaвҗЈbЕҪ1 y вҗӨ . ,

вҗЈ

2 a

q

вҗӨвҗЈ

a

ЕҪ

1

y

вҗЈ

a

.

,

a/b a s b.

a. Show that the model satisfies ЕҪi. symmetry, ЕҪii. marginal homogeneity, ЕҪiii. quasi-symmetry, ЕҪiv. quasi-independence.
b. Show that вҗЈa s вҗІaqs вҗІqa , a s 1, . . . , I. c. Show that вҗӨ s CohenвҖҷs kappa, and interpret вҗ¬ s 0 and вҗ¬ s 1 for
this model.

10.40

A 2 = 2 table has a true odds ratio of 10. Find the cell probabilities for which ЕҪa. вҗІ 1qs вҗІq1 s 0.5, ЕҪb. вҗІ 1qs вҗІq1 s 0.3, and ЕҪc. вҗІ 1qs вҗІq1 s 0.1. Find the value of kappa for each. ЕҪThis shows that for a given association, kappa depends strongly on the marginal probabilities; see also Sprott 2000, p. 59..

10.41

A model for agreement on an ordinal response partitions beyondchance agreement into that due to a baseline association and a main-diagonal increment ЕҪA. Agresti, Biometrics 44: 539бҺҗ548, 1988.. For ordered scores Г„ua4, the model is
log вҗ®ab s вҗӯ q вҗӯaA q вҗӯbB q вҗӨ ua ub q вҗҰ I ЕҪ a s b. . ЕҪ10.35.

a. Show that this is a special case of quasi-symmetry and of quasiassociation ЕҪ10.29..

454

MODELS FOR MATCHED PAIRS

b. For agreement odds ЕҪ10.30., show that log вҗ¶ab s ЕҪub y ua.2вҗӨ q 2 вҗҰ. For unit-spaced scores, show the local odds ratios have log вҗӘab s вҗӨ when none of the four cells falls on the main diagonal.
c. Find the likelihood equations and show that Г„вҗ®ЛҶab4 and Г„nab4 share
the same marginal distributions, correlation, and prevalence of
exact agreement. d. For Table 10.8 using Г„ua s a4, show that ЕҪ10.35. has G2 s 4.8
ЕҪdf s 7., with вҗҰЛҶs 0.842 ЕҪSE s 0.427. and вҗӨЛҶs 1.316 ЕҪSE s 0.420.. Interpret using ЛҶвҗ¶a, aq1 and вҗӘЛҶab for a y b ) 1.

10.42

Refer to the BradleyбҺҗTerry model. a. Show that logЕҪвҢё acrвҢё ca. s logЕҪвҢё abrвҢё ba. q logЕҪвҢё bcrвҢё cb.. b. With this model, is it possible that a could be preferred to b ЕҪi.e.,
вҢё ab ) вҢё ba. and b could be preferred to c, yet c could be preferred to a? Explain. c. Explain why Г„ вҗӨa4 are not identifiable without a constraint such as вҗӨI s 0. ЕҪ Hint: Show the model holds when Г„ вҗӨa* s вҗӨa y c4 for any c..

10.43

Refer to model ЕҪ10.32..
a. Construct a more general model having home-team parameters Г„ вҗӨH i4 and away-team parameters Г„ вҗӨAi4, such that the probability team i beats team j when i is the home team is exp ЕҪвҗӨH i.rwexpЕҪвҗӨH i. q exp ЕҪвҗӨA j.x, where вҗӨA I s 0 but вҗӨH i is unrestricted.
b. Interpret the case Г„ вҗӨH i s вҗӨAi q c4, when ЕҪi. c s 0, and ЕҪii. c ) 0. c. Fit the model to Table 10.12. Compare the fit to model ЕҪ10.32..
Compare Г„ вҗӨЛҶH i4 and Г„ вҗӨЛҶAi4 to describe how teams play at home and
away.

10.44

Find the log likelihood for the BradleyбҺҗTerry model. From the kernel, show that ЕҪgiven Г„ Nab4. the minimal sufficient statistics are Г„naq4. Thus, explain how вҖҳвҖҳ victory totalsвҖҷвҖҷ determine the estimated ranking.

10.45 Explain how to fit the complete symmetry model in T dimensions.

10.46 Prove that if kth-order marginal symmetry holds, jth-order marginal symmetry holds for any j - k.

10.47

Suppose that quasi-symmetry holds for an I T table. When the table is collapsed over a variable, show that the model holds for the I Ty1
table with the same main effects.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 11
Analyzing Repeated Categorical Response Data
Many studies observe the response variable for each subject repeatedly, at several times or under various conditions. Repeated categorical response data occur commonly in health-related applications, especially in longitudinal studies. For example, a physician might evaluate patients at weekly intervals regarding whether a new drug treatment is successful. In some cases explanatory variables may also vary over time. But the repeated responses need not refer to different times. A dental study might measure whether there is decay for each tooth in a subjectвҖҷs mouth.
Often, the responses refer to matched sets, or clusters, of subjects. An example is a ЕҪsurvival, nonsurvival. response for each fetus in a litter, for a sample of pregnant mice exposed to various dosages of a toxin. A multistage sample to study factors affecting obesity in children may regard children from the same family as a cluster. Observations within a cluster tend to be more alike than observations from different clusters. Ordinary analyses that ignore this may be badly inappropriate.
In this chapter we generalize methods of Chapter 10, which referred to matched pairs. In Section 11.1 we compare marginal distributions in T-way tables. The remaining sections extend models to include explanatory variables. For instance, many studies compare the repeated measurements for different groups or treatments. In Section 11.2 we use ML methods for fitting marginal models. In Section 11.3 we use generalized estimating equations ЕҪGEE., a multivariate version of quasi-likelihood that is computationally simpler than ML. Section 11.4 covers technical details about the GEE approach. In the final section we introduce a transitional approach that models observations in terms of previous outcomes.
455

456

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

11.1 COMPARING MARGINAL DISTRIBUTIONS: MULTIPLE RESPONSES

Usually, the multivariate dependence among repeated responses is of less interest than their marginal distributions. For instance, in treating a chronic condition ЕҪsuch as a phobia. with some treatment, the primary goal might be to study whether the probability of success increases over the T weeks of a treatment period. The T success probabilities refer to the T first-order marginal distributions. In Sections 10.2.1 and 10.3 we compared marginal distributions for matched pairs ЕҪT s 2. using models that apply directly to the marginal distributions. In this section we extend this approach to T ) 2.

11.1.1 Binary Marginal Models and Marginal Homogeneity Denote T binary responses by ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , YT .. The marginal logit model ЕҪ10.6. for matched pairs extends to

logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨt , t s 1, . . . , T ,

ЕҪ 11 .1.

with a constraint such as вҗӨT s 0 or вҗЈ s 0. For a possible sequence of outcomes i s ЕҪi1, i2 , . . . , iT . where each it s 0 or 1, let
вҗІ i s P ЕҪ Y1 s i1 , Y2 s i2 , . . . , YT s iT . .

Let вҗІ denote the vector of these probabilities for the possible i. They refer to a 2T table that cross-classifies the T responses and describes the joint distribution of ЕҪY1, . . . , YT .. The sample cell proportions are the ML estimates of вҗІ, and the sample proportion with yt s 1 is the ML estimate of PЕҪYt s 1..
Model ЕҪ11.1. is saturated, describing T marginal probabilities by T parameters. Marginal homogeneity, for which PЕҪY1 s 1. s РёРёРё s PЕҪYT s 1., is the special case вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨT . Even though this case has only one parameter, ML fitting is not simple. The multinomial likelihood refers to the 2T joint cell probabilities вҗІ rather than the T marginal probabilities Г„ PЕҪYt s 1.4. Fitting methods are described in Section 11.2.5.
Let ni denote the sample cell count in cell i. The kernel of the log likelihood LЕҪ вҗІ. is Гқi ni log вҗІ i. Let LЕҪp. denote the log likelihood evaluated at the sample proportions Г„ pi s nirn4, the ML fit of model ЕҪ11.1.. Let
LЕҪ вҗІЛҶ MH . denote the maximized log likelihood assuming marginal homogene-
ity. The likelihood-ratio test of marginal homogeneity ЕҪLipsitz et al. 1990; Madansky 1963. uses

y2

LЕҪ вҗІЛҶ MH . y LЕҪp.

s

2

Гқ

ni

logЕҪ

pirвҗІЛҶ

MH i

.

.

i

ЕҪ 11 .2.

COMPARING MARGINAL DISTRIBUTIONS: MULTIPLE RESPONSES

457

TABLE 11.1 Responses to Three Drugs in a Crossover Study

Drug A Favorable B Favorable B Unfavorable

Drug A Unfavorable B Favorable B Unfavorable

C Favorable

6

2

2

6

C Unfavorable

16

4

4

6

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Biometric Society ЕҪGrizzle et al. 1969..

The asymptotic null chi-squared distribution has df s T y 1, since the general model ЕҪ11.1. has T y 1 more parameters than marginal homogeneity.

11.1.2 Crossover Drug Comparison Example
Table 11.1 comes from a crossover study in which each subject used each of three drugs for treatment of a chronic condition at three times. The response measured the reaction as favorable or unfavorable. The 23 table gives the ЕҪfavorable, unfavorable. classification for reaction to drug A in the first dimension, drug B in the second, and drug C in the third. We assume that the drugs have no carryover effects and that the severity of the condition remained stable for each subject throughout the experiment. These assumptions are reasonable for many chronic conditions, such as migraine headache.
The sample proportion favorable was ЕҪ0.61, 0.61, 0.35. for drugs ЕҪA, B, C.. The likelihood-ratio statistic for testing marginal homogeneity is 5.95 ЕҪdf s 2., for a P-value of 0.05. For simultaneous confidence intervals comparing pairs of treatments with overall error probability no greater than 0.05, the Bonferroni method uses confidence coefficient ЕҪ1 y 0.05r3. s 0.9833 for each. For instance, from formula ЕҪ10.1., the estimate 0.261 s 0.609 y 0.348 of the difference between drugs A and C has an estimated standard error of 0.108. The confidence interval for the true difference is 0.261 " 2.39ЕҪ0.108., or ЕҪ0.002, 0.520.. The same interval holds for comparison of drugs B and C. There is some evidence that the proportion of favorable responses is lower for drug C.
The sample size is not large, however, so we view these results with caution. For each pair of drugs, a 2 = 2 table relates the two responses. An exact binomial test ЕҪSection 10.4.1. uses its off-diagonal counts. These yield P-values of 1.0 for comparing drugs A and B and 0.036 for comparing A with C and for comparing B with C.

11.1.3 Modeling Margins of a Multicategory Response

The binary marginal model ЕҪ11.1. extends to multinomial responses. With baseline-category logits for I outcome categories, the saturated model is

log P ЕҪ Yt s j . rP ЕҪ Yt s I . s вҗӨt j ,

t s 1, . . . , T,

j s 1, . . . , I y 1.
ЕҪ 11 .3.

458

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

Marginal homogeneity, whereby PЕҪY1 s j. s РёРёРё s PЕҪYT s j. for j s 1, . . . , I y 1, is the special case in which

вҗӨ1 j s вҗӨ2 j s РёРёРё s вҗӨT j , j s 1, . . . , I y 1.

The likelihood-ratio test of marginal homogeneity comparing the two models has form ЕҪ11.2. and df s ЕҪT y 1.ЕҪ I y 1..
For an ordinal response, an unsaturated model that is more complex than marginal homogeneity focuses on shifts up and down in the T margins. One such model is
logit P ЕҪ Yt F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨt , t s 1, . . . , T , j s 1, . . . , I y 1, ЕҪ11.4.

with constraint such as вҗӨT s 0. Marginal homogeneity is the special case вҗӨ1 s РёРёРё s вҗӨT . Its test has df s T y 1. The Г„ вҗЈj4 satisfy вҗЈ1 - . . . - вҗЈIy1 because of the ordering of the cumulative probabilities. These models can be
fitted using ML methodology presented in Section 11.2.5.

11.1.4 Wald and Generalized CMH Score Tests of Marginal Homogeneity

In this chapter we focus on modeling the marginal distributions rather than merely testing marginal homogeneity. However, a variety of tests are available besides the likelihood ratio, so we briefly summarize a couple of them.
Let pjЕҪt. denote the sample proportion in category j for response Yt, let

pj s Гқ pj ЕҪ t . rT ,
t

dj ЕҪ t . s pj ЕҪ t . y pj ,

and let d denote the vector of Г„djЕҪt., t s 1, . . . , T y 1, j s 1, . . . , I y 14. Let
VЛҶ denote the estimated covariance matrix of 'n d. Bhapkar ЕҪ1973. proposed
the Wald statistic

W s ndX VЛҶy1 d.

ЕҪ 11 .5.

for the general alternative. This generalizes ЕҪ10.16. and has a large-sample chi-squared distribution with df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪT y 1..
Other statistics are special cases of the generalized CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗ Haenszel ЕҪCMH. statistic ЕҪSection 7.5.3.. Recall that for the binary case ЕҪ I s 2. with matched pairs ЕҪT s 2., the CMH statistic applies to a three-way table ЕҪsee, e.g., Table 10.2. in which each stratum shows the two outcomes for a given subject. A generalization of Table 10.2 provides n strata of T = I tables. The kth stratum gives the T outcomes for subject k. Row t in a stratum has a 1 in the column that is the outcome for observation t, and 0 in all other columns ЕҪor 0 in every column if that observation is missing.. Probability distributions for the subject-stratified setup naturally relate to

MARGINAL MODELING: MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD APPROACH

459

subject-specific models such as logit model ЕҪ10.8., rather than to marginal models. However, conditional independence in this three-way table ЕҪgiven subject. corresponds to an exchangeability among variables in the I T table that implies marginal homogeneity. A generalized CMH test of conditional independence in the T = I = n table also tests marginal homogeneity using a sampling distribution generated under the stronger exchangeability condition ЕҪDarroch 1981.. For an ordinal response with fixed scores, the generalized CMH statistic for detecting variability among T means is appropriate.
When I s 2 and T s 2, this CMH approach is equivalent to McNemarвҖҷs statistic. When I s 2 but T ) 2, the generalized CMH statistic treating the T responses as unordered is identical to a statistic Cochran ЕҪ1950. proposed. His statistic, called CochranвҖҷs Q, has df s T y 1 ЕҪProblem 11.22..

11.2 MARGINAL MODELING: MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD APPROACH
Analyses above compared marginal distributions, but without accounting for explanatory variables. We now include such predictors. In this section we use ML, but we defer model fitting details to the end of the section.

11.2.1 Longitudinal Mental Depression Example
We use Table 11.2 to illustrate a variety of analyses in this and the next chapter. It refers to a longitudinal study comparing a new drug with a standard drug for treatment of subjects suffering mental depression ЕҪKoch et al. 1977.. Subjects were classified into two initial diagnosis groups according to whether severity of depression was mild or severe. In each group, subjects were randomly assigned to one of the two drugs. Following 1 week, 2 weeks, and 4 weeks of treatment, each subjectвҖҷs suffering from mental depression was classified as normal or abnormal.

TABLE 11.2 Cross-Classification of Responses on Depression at Three Times by Diagnosis and Treatment

Response at Three Timesa

Diagnosis Treatment NNN NNA NAN NAA ANN ANA AAN

Mild

Standard 16 13

9

New drug 31

0

6

Severe Standard

2

2

8

New drug

7

2

5

3

14

4 15

0

22

2

9

9

9 15 27

2

31

5 32

aN, normal; A, abnormal. Source: Reprinted with permission from the Biometric Society ЕҪKoch et al. 1977..

AAA
6 0 28 6

460

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

Table 11.2 shows four groups, the combinations of categories of the two explanatory variables: treatment type and severity of initial diagnosis. Since the study observed the binary response ЕҪdepression assessment. at T s 3 occasions, Table 11.2 shows a 23 table for each group. The three depression assessments form a multivariate response variable with three components, with Yt s 1 for normal and 0 for abnormal. The 12 marginal distributions result from three repeated observations for each of the four groups.
Let s denote the severity of the initial diagnosis, with s s 1 for severe and s s 0 for mild. Let d denote the drug, with d s 1 for new and d s 0 for standard. Let t denote the time of measurement. Koch et al. ЕҪ1977. noted that if the time metric reflects cumulative drug dosage, a logit scale often has a linear effect for the logarithm of time. They used scores ЕҪ0, 1, 2., the logs to base 2 of the week numbers ЕҪ1, 2, and 4., for time.
Table 11.3 shows sample proportions of normal responses ЕҪi.e., yt s 1. for the 12 marginal distributions. For instance, from Table 11.2, the sample proportion of normal responses after week 1 for subjects with mild initial diagnosis using the standard drug was ЕҪ16 q 13 q 9 q 3.rЕҪ16 q 13 q 9 q 3 q 14 q 4 q 15 q 6. s 0.51. The sample proportion of normal responses ЕҪ1. increased over time for each group; ЕҪ2. increased at a faster rate for the new drug than the standard, for each fixed initial diagnosis; and ЕҪ3. was higher for the mild than the severe initial diagnosis, for each treatment at each occasion. In such a study the company that developed the new drug would hope to show that patients have a significantly higher rate of improvement with it.
The marginal logit model
logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 s q вҗӨ2 d q вҗӨ3 t
has the main effects of the explanatory variables ЕҪseverity of initial diagnosis and drug. and of the variable ЕҪtime. that specifies the different components of the multivariate response. Its linear time effect вҗӨ3 is the same for each group.
The natural sampling assumption is multinomial for the eight cells in the 23 cross-classification of the three responses, independently for the four

TABLE 11.3 Sample Marginal Proportions of Normal Response for Depression Data of Table 11.2

Sample Proportion

Diagnosis

Treatment

Week 1

Week 2

Mild

Standard

0.51

0.59

New drug

0.53

0.79

Severe

Standard

0.21

0.28

New drug

0.18

0.50

Week 4
0.68 0.97 0.46 0.83

MARGINAL MODELING: MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD APPROACH

461

groups. However, the model refers to 12 marginal probabilities ЕҪfor 2 drug treatments = 2 initial severity diagnoses = 3 time points. rather than the 4 = 23 s 32 cell probabilities in the product multinomial likelihood function. The three marginal binomial variates for each group are dependent. ML
estimation requires an iterative routine for maximizing the product multino-
mial likelihood, subject to the constraint that the marginal probabilities
satisfy the model. An algorithm for this is given in Section 11.2.5.
A check of model fit compares the 32 cell counts in Table 11.2 to their ML
fitted values. Since the model describes 12 marginal logits using four parameters, residual df s 8. The deviance G2 s 34.6. The poor fit is not surprising. The model assumes a common rate of improvement вҗӨ3, but the sample shows a higher rate for the new drug.
A more realistic model permits the time effect to differ by drug,

logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 s q вҗӨ2 d q вҗӨ3 t q вҗӨ4 dt.

Its time effect estimate is вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.48 ЕҪSE s 0.12. for the standard drug ЕҪ d s 0. and вҗӨЛҶ3 q вҗӨЛҶ4 s 1.49 ЕҪSE s 0.14. for the new one ЕҪ d s 1.. For the new drug, the slope is вҗӨЛҶ4 s 1.01 ЕҪSE s 0.18. higher than for the standard,
giving strong evidence of faster improvement. This model fits much better, with G2 s 4.2 ЕҪdf s 7.. The G2 decrease of 34.6 y 4.2 s 30.4 compared to the simpler model is the likelihood-ratio test of H0: вҗӨ4 s 0, a common time effect for each drug.
The severity of initial diagnosis estimate is вҗӨЛҶ1 s y1.29 ЕҪSE s 0.14.; for
each drugбҺҗtime combination, the estimated odds of a normal response when the initial diagnosis was severe equal expЕҪy1.29. s 0.27 times the estimated
odds when the initial diagnosis was mild. The estimate вҗӨЛҶ2 s y0.06 ЕҪSE s
0.22. indicates an insignificant difference between the drugs after 1 week ЕҪfor which t s 0.. At time t, the estimated odds of normal response with the new drug are expЕҪy0.06 q 1.01 t. times the estimated odds for the standard drug,
for each initial diagnosis level. In summary, severity of initial diagnosis, drug
treatment, and time all have substantial effects on the probability of a normal
response.

11.2.2 Modeling a Repeated Multinomial Response
Models for marginal distributions of a repeated binary response generalize to multicategory responses. At observation t, the marginal response distribution has I y 1 logits. With nominal responses, baseline-category logit models describe the odds of each outcome relative to a baseline. For ordinal responses, one might use cumulative logit models.
For a particular marginal logit, a model has the form
X
logit j ЕҪ t . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ j x t , j s 1, . . . , I y 1, t s 1, . . . .

462

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

For an ordinal response, perhaps logit jЕҪt. s logitw PЕҪYt F j.x. Then, вҗӨ j may simplify to вҗӨ, in which case the model takes the proportional odds form with the same effects for each logit. Some parameters in вҗӨ may refer to the variable subscripted by t ЕҪe.g., time. that indexes the repeated measurements.
One can then compare marginal distributions at particular settings of x or
evaluate effects of x on the response. In either case, checking for interaction
is crucial. For instance, are the effects of x the same at each t?

11.2.3 Insomnia Example
Table 11.4 shows results of a randomized, double-blind clinical trial comparing an active hypnotic drug with a placebo in patients who have insomnia problems. The response is the patientвҖҷs reported time ЕҪin minutes. to fall asleep after going to bed. Patients responded before and following a two-week treatment period. The two treatments, active and placebo, form a binary explanatory variable. The subjects receiving the two treatments were independent samples.
Table 11.5 displays sample marginal distributions for the four treatmentбҺҗoccasion combinations. From the initial to follow-up occasion, time to falling asleep seems to shift downward for both treatments. The degree of shift seems greater for the active treatment, indicating possible interaction. The response variable is a discrete version of a continuous variable, so by the derivation in Section 7.2.3 a cumulative link model is natural. The proportional odds model

logit P ЕҪ Yt F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1t q вҗӨ2 x q вҗӨ3 tx

ЕҪ 11 .6.

permits interaction between t s occasion ЕҪ0 s initial, 1 s follow-up. and

TABLE 11.4 Time to Falling Asleep, by Treatment and Occasion

Treatment

Initial

Time to Falling Asleep

Follow-up

- 20

20бҺҗ30

30бҺҗ60

) 60

Active

- 20

7

4

1

0

20бҺҗ30

11

5

2

2

30бҺҗ60

13

23

3

1

) 60

9

17

13

8

Placebo

- 20

7

4

20бҺҗ30

14

5

30бҺҗ60

6

9

) 60

4

11

2

1

1

0

18

2

14

22

Source: From S. F. Francom, C.Chuang-Stein, and J. R. Landis, Statist. Med. 8: 571бҺҗ582 ЕҪ1989.. Reprinted with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

MARGINAL MODELING: MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD APPROACH

TABLE 11.5
Treatment Active Placebo

Sample Marginal Distributions of Table 11.4

Occasion

- 20

Response

20бҺҗ30

30бҺҗ60

Initial Follow-up
Initial Follow-up

0.101 0.336
0.117 0.258

0.168 0.412
0.167 0.242

0.336 0.160
0.292 0.292

463
) 60 0.395 0.092 0.425 0.208

x s treatment ЕҪ0 s placebo, 1 s active., but assumes the same effects for each response cutpoint.
For ML model fitting, G2 s 8.0 ЕҪdf s 6. for comparing observed to fitted cell counts in modeling the 12 marginal logits using these six parameters. The
ML estimates are вҗӨЛҶ1 s 1.074 ЕҪSE s 0.162., вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.046 ЕҪSE s 0.236., and вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.662 ЕҪSE s 0.244.. This shows evidence of interaction. At the initial
observation, the estimated odds that time to falling asleep for the active treatment is below any fixed level equal expЕҪ0.046. s 1.04 times the estimated odds for the placebo treatment; at the follow-up observation, the effect is expЕҪ0.046 q 0.662. s 2.03. In other words, initially the two groups had similar distributions, but at the follow-up those with the active treatment tended to fall asleep more quickly.
For simpler interpretation, it can be helpful to report sample marginal means and their differences. With response scores Г„10, 25, 45, 754 for time to fall asleep, the initial means were 50.0 for the active group and 50.3 for the placebo. The difference in means between the initial and follow-up responses was 22.2 for the active group and 13.0 for the placebo. The difference between these differences of means equals 9.2, with SE s 3.0, indicating that the change was significantly greater for the active group.
11.2.4 Comparisons That Control for Initial Response
For data such as Table 11.4, suppose that the marginal distributions for initial response are identical for the treatment groups. This is true, apart from sampling error, with random assignment of subjects to the groups. Suppose also that conditional on the initial response, the follow-up response distribution is identical for the treatment groups. Then, the follow-up marginal distributions are also identical.
If the initial marginal distributions are not identical, however, the difference between follow-up and initial marginal distributions may differ between treatment groups, even though their conditional distributions for follow-up response are identical. In such cases, although marginal models can be useful, they may not tell the entire story. It may be more informative to construct models that compare the follow-up responses while controlling for the initial response.

464

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

Let Y2 denote the follow-up response, for treatment x with initial response y1. In the model

logit P ЕҪ Y2 F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1 x q вҗӨ2 y1 ,

ЕҪ 11 .7.

вҗӨ1 compares the follow-up distributions for the treatments, controlling for initial observation. This is an analog of an analysis-of-covariance model, with
ordinal rather than continuous response. This cumulative logit model refers to a univariate response ЕҪY2 . rather than marginal distributions of a multivariate response ЕҪY1, Y2 .. It is an example of a transitional model, discussed in the final section of this chapter.

11.2.5 ML Fitting of Marginal Logit Models*

ML fitting of marginal logit models is awkward. For T observations on an I-category response, at each setting of predictors the likelihood refers to I T
multinomial joint probabilities, but the model applies to T sets of marginal multinomial parameters Г„ PЕҪYt s k., k s 1, . . . , I4. The marginal multinomial variates are not independent.
Let вҗІ denote the complete set of multinomial joint probabilities for all
settings of predictors. Marginal logit models have the generalized loglinear
model form

C logЕҪAвҗІ . s XвҗӨ

ЕҪ 11 .8.

introduced in Section 8.5.4. In the binary case, the matrix A applied to вҗІ forms the T marginal probabilities Г„ PЕҪYt s 1.4 and their complements at each setting of predictors. The matrix C applied to the log marginal probabilities forms the T marginal logits for each setting; each row of C has 1 in the position multiplied by the log numerator probability for a given marginal logit, y1 in the position multiplied by the log denominator probability, and 0 elsewhere.
For instance, for the model of marginal homogeneity in a 2T table with no covariates, вҗӨ is a single parameter, denoted by вҗЈ in ЕҪ11.1.. For T s 2, вҗІ has four elements, and this model is

1 1 0 0 вҗІ 11

1 y1 0 0 log 0 0 1 1 s вҗІ 12 1 вҗЈ ,

0 0 1 y1

1 0 1 0 вҗІ 21

1

0 1 0 1 вҗІ 22

which sets both logit ЕҪвҗІ 11 q вҗІ 12 . s logit w PЕҪY1 s 1.x and logitЕҪвҗІ 11 q вҗІ 21. s logitw PЕҪY2 s 1.x equal to вҗЈ.
The likelihood function l ЕҪ вҗІ. for a marginal logit model is the product of
the multinomial mass functions from the various predictor settings. One

MARGINAL MODELING: MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD APPROACH

465

approach for ML fitting views the model as a set of constraints and uses methods for maximizing a function subject to constraints. In model ЕҪ11.8., let U denote a full column rank matrix such that the space spanned by the columns of U is the orthogonal complement of the space spanned by the columns of X. Then, UX X s 0, and the model has the equivalent constraint form
UXC logЕҪAвҗІ . s 0.
For instance, for marginal homogeneity in a 2 = 2 table with ЕҪ11.8. as expressed above, UX s ЕҪ1, y1.. Then UX applied to C logЕҪAвҗІ. sets the difference between the row and column marginal logits equal to 0.
This method of maximizing the likelihood incorporates these model constraints as well as identifiability constraints, which constrain the response probabilities at each predictor setting to sum to 1. We express this collection of model constraints UXC logЕҪAвҗІ. s 0 and identifiability constraints as fЕҪ вҗІ. s 0. The method introduces Lagrange multipliers corresponding to these constraints and solves the Lagrangian likelihood equations using a NewtonбҺҗ Raphson algorithm ЕҪAitchison and Silvey 1958; Haber 1985.. Let вҗӘ be a vector having elements вҗІ and the Lagrange multipliers вҗӯ . The Lagrangian likelihood equations have form hЕҪвҗӘ. s 0, where
hЕҪ вҗӘ. s hЕҪ вҗІ , вҗӯ . s ЕҪfЕҪ вҗІ . , СЁ log l ЕҪ вҗІ . rСЁ вҗІ q СЁ fЕҪ вҗІ . rСЁ вҗІ X вҗӯ .X

is a vector with terms involving the contrasts in marginal logits that the model specifies as constraints as well as log-likelihood derivatives.
The NewtonбҺҗRaphson method then is

вҗӘЕҪtq1. s вҗӘЕҪt. y

СЁ hЕҪ вҗӘЕҪt. . y1 hЕҪ вҗӘЕҪt. . ,
СЁвҗӘ

t s 1, . . . .

This can be computationally intensive because the derivative matrix inverted has dimensions larger than the number of elements in вҗІ. A refinement ЕҪLang 1996a; Lang and Agresti 1994. uses an asymptotic approximation to a reparameterized derivative matrix that has a much simpler form, requiring inverting only a diagonal matrix and a symmetric positive definite matrix.
This ML marginal fitting method is available in specialized software ЕҪAppendix A mentions an S-Plus function.. It makes no assumption about the model that describes the joint distribution вҗІ. Thus, when the marginal model holds, the ML estimate of вҗӨ in ЕҪ11.8. is consistent regardless of the dependence structure for that distribution. Several alternative fitting approaches have been considered. Lang and Agresti ЕҪ1994. simultaneously fitted a marginal model and an unsaturated loglinear model for вҗІ. The complete model can be specified as a special case of ЕҪ11.8. and fitted using the constraint approach with Lagrange multipliers just described. In standard cases, the marginal and joint model parameters are orthogonal. If the

466

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

marginal model holds, the ML estimator of the marginal model parameters is consistent even if the model for the joint distribution is incorrect.
Fitzmaurice and Laird ЕҪ1993. gave a related ML approach. A one-to-one correspondence holds between вҗІ and parameters of the saturated loglinear model. They used a further one-to-one correspondence between the main effect and the higher-order parameters of that loglinear model with the marginal probabilities and those same higher-order loglinear parameters. Models were then specified separately for the marginal probabilities and the higher-order ЕҪconditional. loglinear parameters. The likelihood is then maximized in terms of the two sets of model parameters. Again, the two sets of parameters are orthogonal, so the ML estimator of marginal model parameters is consistent when the marginal model holds. This mixed parameter approach is also available in specialized software ЕҪKastner et al. 1997; see also Appendix A..
Yet another ML approach uses a one-to-one correspondence between вҗІ and parameters that describe the marginal distributions, the bivariate distributions, the trivariate distributions, and so on ЕҪe.g., Glonek and McCullagh 1995; Molenberghs and Lesaffre 1994.. Multivariate logistic models then apply to the component distributions, although some higher-order effects may be assumed to vanish, for simplicity. Glonek ЕҪ1996. proposed a hybrid of this and the Fitzmaurice and Laird ЕҪ1993. approach.

11.3 MARGINAL MODELING: GENERALIZED ESTIMATING EQUATIONS (GEE) APPROACH
At each combination of predictor values, ML fitting assumes a multinomial distribution for the I T cell probabilities for the T observations on an I-category response. As the number of predictors increases, the number of multinomial probabilities increases dramatically. Currently, all the ML approaches described above are not practical when T is large or there are many predictors, especially when some are continuous. Compared to the continuous-response case using the multivariate normal, marginal modeling of multivariate categorical responses is also hindered by the lack of a simple multivariate distribution for describing correlations among the T responses. For instance, with T means and a common variance and correlation, the multivariate normal has only T q 2 parameters, compared to the I T y 1 parameters for the multinomial.
An alternative to ML fitting uses a multivariate generalization of quasilikelihood ЕҪSection 4.7.. Rather than assuming a particular distribution for Y, the quasi-likelihood method specifies only the first two moments; it links the mean to a linear predictor and also specifies how the variance depends on the mean. The estimates are solutions of estimating equations that are likelihood equations under the further assumption of a distribution in the exponential family with that mean and variance ЕҪWedderburn 1974..

MARGINAL MODELING: GENERALIZED ESTIMATING EQUATIONS APPROACH 467
11.3.1 Generalized Estimating Equation Methodology: Basic Ideas
Repeated measurement provides a multivariate response ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , YT ., where T sometimes varies by subject. As in the univariate case, the quasilikelihood method specifies a model for вҗ® s EЕҪY . and specifies a variance function В®ЕҪвҗ®. describing how varЕҪY . depends on вҗ®. Now, though, that model applies to the marginal distribution for each Yt. The method also requires a working guess for the correlation structure among Г„Yt4. The estimates are solutions of quasi-likelihood equations called generalized estimating equations. The method is often referred to as the GEE method. Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1986. proposed it for marginal modeling with GLMs. Their work built on related material in the econometrics literature ЕҪe.g., Gourieroux et al. 1984; Hansen 1982; White 1982.. We outline concepts here and give more details in Section 11.4.
The GEE approach utilizes an assumed covariance structure for ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , YT ., specifying a variance function and a pairwise correlation pattern, without assuming a particular multivariate distribution. The GEE estimates of model parameters are valid even if one misspecifies the covariance structure. Consistency ЕҪi.e., estimates converging in probability to the true parameters. depends on the first moment but not the second. Specifically, suppose that the model is correct in the sense that the chosen link function and linear predictor truly describe how EЕҪYt. depend on the predictors, t s 1, . . . , T. Then the GEE model parameter estimators are consistent.
In practice, a chosen model is never exactly correct. This result is useful, however, for suggesting that the correlation structure need not adversely affect the quality of estimates for whatever model one uses. Often, no a priori information is available about this structure, and the correlation is regarded as a nuisance. A simple implementation of the GEE method naively treats Г„Yt4 as pairwise independent. Although parameter estimates are usually fine under this naive assumption, standard errors are not. More appropriate standard errors result from an adjustment the GEE method makes using the empirical dependence the data exhibit. The naive standard errors based on the independence assumption are updated using the information the data provide about the actual dependence structure to yield more appropriate ЕҪ robust. standard errors.
As an alternative to estimates that treat Г„Yt4 as pairwise independent, the GEE method can use a working guess about the correlation structure but again empirically adjust the standard error. The exchangeable working correlation structure treats corrЕҪYt, Ys. as identical for all s and t. This is more flexible and realistic than the naive independence assumption. Even more realistic is an unstructured working correlation that permits a separate correlation for each pair. When T is large, however, this approach suffers some efficiency loss because of the many additional parameters.
In theory, choosing the working correlation wisely can pay benefits of improved efficiency of estimation. However, Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1986. noted

468

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

that estimators based on independence working correlation can have surprisingly good efficiency when the actual correlation is weak to moderate. One can check the sensitivity to the selection by comparing results for different working correlation assumptions. In our experience, when the correlations are modest, all working correlation structures yield similar GEE estimates and standard errors, as the empirical dependence has a large impact on adjusting the naive standard errors. ЕҪIf they differed substantially, a more careful study of the correlation structure would be necessary.. Unless one expects dramatic differences among the correlations, we recommend the exchangeable working correlation structure. This recognizes the dependence at the cost of only one extra parameter.
The GEE approach is appealing for categorical data because of its computational simplicity compared to ML. Advantages include not requiring a multivariate distribution and the consistency of estimation even with misspecified correlation structure. However, it has limitations. Since the GEE approach does not completely specify the joint distribution, it does not have a likelihood function. Likelihood-based methods are not available for testing fit, comparing models, and conducting inference about parameters. Instead, inference uses Wald statistics constructed with the asymptotic normality of the estimators together with their estimated covariance matrix. However, unless the sample size is quite large, the empirically based standard errors tend to underestimate the true ones ЕҪe.g., Firth 1993b.. As estimators, those standard errors can also show more variability than parametric estimators ЕҪKauermann and Carroll 2001.. Boos ЕҪ1992. and Rotnitzky and Jewell ЕҪ1990. proposed analogs of score tests for effects of predictors, using quasilog-likelihood, that may be more trustworthy than Wald tests. Some statisticians ЕҪe.g., Lindsey 1999. are critical of the GEE approach because of the lack of likelihood. Others do not find this problematic, as they regard GEE as an estimation method rather than a model.

11.3.2 Longitudinal Mental Depression Example
For Table 11.2 comparing two treatments for mental depression, ML fitting of a logit model with drug = time interaction was used in Section 11.2.1. The GEE analysis provides similar results, regardless of the choice of working correlation structure. With the exchangeable structure, the GEE estimated
slope ЕҪon the logit scale. for the standard drug is вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.48 ЕҪSE s 0.12.. For the new drug the slope increases by вҗӨЛҶ4 s 1.02 ЕҪSE s 0.19.. Table 11.6 shows
results using the independence working correlations. Estimates are the same to two decimal places. The initial estimates and standard errors there are those that apply if the repeated responses are truly independent. They equal those obtained by using ordinary logistic regression with 3 = 340 s 1020 independent observations rather than treating the data as three dependent observations for each of 340 subjects. The empirical standard errors incorporate the sample dependence to adjust the independence-based standard errors.

MARGINAL MODELING: GENERALIZED ESTIMATING EQUATIONS APPROACH 469

TABLE 11.6 Output from Using GEE to Fit Logit Model to Table 11.2

Initial Parameter Estimates

Parameter Intercept diagnose drug time drug)time

Estimate y0.0280 y1.3139 y0.0596
0.4824 1.0174

Std Error 0.1639 0.1464 0.2222 0.1148 0.1888

GEE Parameter Estimates Empirical Std Error Estimates

Parameter Intercept diagnose drug time drug)time

Estimate y0.0280 y1.3139 y0.0596
0.4824 1.0174

Std Error 0.1742 0.1460 0.2285 0.1199 0.1877

Row1 Row2 Row3

Working Correlation Matrix

Col1

Col2

Col3

1.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

1.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

1.0000

With exchangeable correlation structure, the estimated common correlation between pairs of the three responses is y0.003. The successive observations apparently have pairwise appearance like independent observations. This is quite unusual for repeated measurement data. For this reason, similar results occur from fitting the model assuming the three observations for a subject actually come from three separate subjects ЕҪi.e., assuming 1020 independent observations..
11.3.3 GEE Approach for Multinomial Responses: Insomnia Example Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1986. originally specified the GEE methodology for modeling univariate marginal distributions, such as the binomial and Poisson. It extends to marginal modeling of multinomial responses. Lipsitz et al. ЕҪ1994. outlined a GEE approach for cumulative logit models with repeated ordinal responses. With this approach, for each pair of outcome categories one selects a working correlation matrix for the pairs of repeated observations. Each multinomial response at a fixed observation uses the ЕҪ I y 1. = ЕҪ I y 1. multinomial covariance matrix. Section 11.4.4 has details.
We illustrate for the insomnia data of Table 11.4. In Section 11.2.3 we used ML to fit the marginal model
logit P ЕҪ Yt F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1t q вҗӨ2 x q вҗӨ3 tx
for Yt s time to fall asleep with treatment x at occasion t. With indepen-
dence working correlation structure, the GEE estimates are вҗӨЛҶ1 s 1.038 ЕҪSE s 0.168., вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.034 ЕҪSE s 0.238., and вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.708 ЕҪSE s 0.244.. The
estimates are similar to the ML estimates, and the substantive conclusions are the same. Considerable evidence exists that the distribution of time to fall asleep decreased more for the treatment group than for the placebo group.

470

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

11.4 QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND ITS GEE MULTIVARIATE EXTENSION: DETAILS*

A GLM assumes a certain distribution for the response variable. Sometimes

it is unclear how to select it. However, often there is a plausible relationship between the mean and variance, such as В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫвҗ®i for count data. Then, an alternative to ML estimation is quasi-likelihood estimation ЕҪSection 4.7..

We next present some details about this method and its GEE extension for

marginal modeling of multivariate responses.

We begin with models for a single response and later discuss marginal

models for a multivariate response. For subject i, i s 1, . . . , n, let yi be the outcome on Y with вҗ®i s EЕҪYi. and variance function В®ЕҪвҗ®i., and let xi j be the

value of explanatory variable j. For link function g, the linear predictor is вҗ©i s gЕҪвҗ®i. s Гқj вҗӨj xi j s x iX вҗӨ. The quasi-likelihood ЕҪQL. parameter estimates
вҗӨЛҶ are the solutions of quasi-score equations

Еҫ / uЕҪвҗӨ. s Гқ i

СЁвҗ®i y1 X
В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . ЕҪ yi y вҗ®i . s 0,
СЁвҗӨ

ЕҪ 11 .9.

where вҗ®i s gy1ЕҪxXiвҗӨ.. These estimating equations are the same as the likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. for GLMs when we substitute

СЁвҗ®i СЁвҗ®i СЁвҗ©i СЁвҗ®i СЁвҗӨj s СЁвҗ©i СЁвҗӨj s СЁвҗ©i xi j .

They are not likelihood equations, however, without the extra assumption that Г„ yi4 has distribution in the natural exponential family. Under that assumption, В®ЕҪвҗ®i. characterizes the distribution within the natural exponen-
tial family ЕҪJoЦҖ rgensen 1987.. Another motivation for equations ЕҪ11.9. is that
with В®ЕҪвҗ®i. replaced by known variance В®i, they result from the weighted least squares problem of minimizing ГқiЕҪ yi y вҗ®i.2 В®y1 i .
The likelihood equations ЕҪ4.22. for a GLM depend only on the mean and variance of Г„ yi4 and the link function g, which determines СЁвҗ®irСЁвҗ©i. Thus, Wedderburn ЕҪ1974. suggested using them as estimating equations for any link and variance function, even if they do not correspond to a particular member of the natural exponential family.

11.4.1 Properties of Quasi-likelihood Estimators
In the quasi-likelihood ЕҪQL. method, the quasi-score function ujЕҪвҗӨ. in ЕҪ11.9. is called an unbiased estimating function; this term refers to any function hЕҪy; вҗӨ. of y and вҗӨ such that Ew hЕҪY; вҗӨ.x s 0 for all вҗӨ. The equations ЕҪ11.9.
that determine вҗӨЛҶ are called estimating equations.
The quasi-likelihood method treats the quasi-score function as the derivative of a function called the quasi-log likelihood. This function may not be a

QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND ITS GEE MULTIVARIATE EXTENSIONS: DETAILS

471

proper log likelihood function. Nonetheless, McCullagh ЕҪ1983. showed that QL estimators have properties similar to those of ML estimators. For
instance, the QL estimators вҗӨЛҶ are asymptotically normal with covariance
matrix approximated by

Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁвҗ®i X

y1 СЁвҗ®i y1

Vs Гқ

В®ЕҪ вҗ®i .

.

i СЁвҗӨ

СЁвҗӨ

ЕҪ 11 .10.

This is equivalent to the formula for the large-sample covariance matrix of

the ML estimator in a GLM wwhich is estimated by ЕҪ4.28.x.

p

A key result is that the QL estimator вҗӨЛҶ is consistent for вҗӨ ЕҪi.e., вҗӨЛҶ вҗӨ.

6

even if the variance function is misspecified, as long as the specification is

correct for the link function and linear predictor. That is, assuming that the
model form gЕҪвҗ®i. s Гқj вҗӨj xi j is correct, the consistency of вҗӨЛҶ holds even if the
true variance function is not В®ЕҪвҗ®i.. We now give a heuristic explanation for

this. When truly вҗ®i s gy1 ЕҪГқj вҗӨj xi j., then from ЕҪ11.9., Ew ujЕҪвҗӨ.x s 0 for all j.
From ЕҪ11.9., uЕҪвҗӨ.rn is a vector of sample means. By a law of large numbers,
it converges in probability to its expected value of 0. The solution вҗӨЛҶ of the

quasi-score equations is a continuous function of these sample means, so it
converges to вҗӨ, since вҗӨЛҶ is the value of вҗӨ for which the sum is exactly equal

to 0. The consistency also follows from general results for unbiased estimating functions ЕҪLiang and Zeger 1995..

11.4.2 Sandwich Covariance Adjustment for Variance Misspecification

If one assumes that varЕҪYi. s В®ЕҪвҗ®i. but the true varЕҪYi. / В®ЕҪвҗ®i., then the
actual asymptotic covariance matrix of the QL estimator вҗӨЛҶ is not V as given
in ЕҪ11.10.. Instead, it is ЕҪDiggle et al. 2001; White 1982.

Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁвҗ®i y1 X

y1 СЁвҗ®i

VГқ

В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . varЕҪ Yi . В®ЕҪ вҗ®i .

V.

i СЁвҗӨ

СЁвҗӨ

ЕҪ 11 .11.

Even though the variances are scalar, we express the matrices in this form to motivate the GEE multivariate extension discussed below. Matrix ЕҪ11.11. simplifies to V if varЕҪYi. s В®ЕҪвҗ®i.. In practice, the true variance function is unknown. A consistent estimator of ЕҪ11.11. is a sample analog, replacing вҗ®i
by вҗ®ЛҶi and varЕҪYi. by ЕҪ yi y вҗ®ЛҶi.2 ЕҪLiang and Zeger 1986.. The estimated
covariance matrix is valid regardless of whether the variance specification В®ЕҪвҗ®i. is correct. This estimated covariance matrix is called a sandwich estimator, because the empirical evidence is sandwiched between the model-
driven covariance matrices.
In summary, even with incorrect specification of the variance function, one can still consistently estimate вҗӨ and one can estimate the asymptotic variance

472

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

of вҗӨЛҶ by estimating the sandwich adjustment ЕҪ11.11.. However, some effi-
ciency loss occurs when the variance chosen, В®ЕҪвҗ®i., is wildly inaccurate. Also, the number of clusters n may need to be large for the sample version of ЕҪ11.11. to work well; otherwise, it can be biased downward. Of course, a
modeling process never gets anything exactly correct. Just as the variance function chosen only approximates the true one ЕҪhopefully, closely., so is the
specification for the mean only approximate.

11.4.3 GEE Methodology: Technical Details
Now we consider the generalized estimating equations ЕҪGEE. multivariate generalization of QL. For subject i, let yi s ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yiTi.X and вҗ®i s ЕҪвҗ®i1, . . . , вҗ®iTi.X, where вҗ®it s EЕҪYit .. The number Ti of responses may vary by cluster. Let x it denote a p = 1 vector of explanatory variable values for yit. The notation allows for cases where explanatory variables also vary for the repeated measurements. The linear predictor of the model is вҗ©it s gЕҪвҗ®it . s x itX вҗӨ for link function g. The model refers to the marginal distribution at each t rather than the joint distribution. Let X i be the Ti = p matrix of predictor values for cluster ЕҪor subject. i, for which row t is x itX .
We assume that yit has probability mass function of form
f ЕҪ yit ; вҗӘit , вҗҫ . s exp ВҪ yit вҗӘit y bЕҪ вҗӘit . вҗҫ q cЕҪ yit , вҗҫ . 5 .

When вҗҫ is known, this is the natural exponential family with natural parameter вҗӘit. From Section 4.4.1,
вҗ®it s EЕҪ Yit . s bX ЕҪ вҗӘit . , В®ЕҪ вҗ®it . s varЕҪ Yit . s bY ЕҪ вҗӘit . вҗҫ .
The GEE method also assumes a working correlation matrix RЕҪвҗЈ . for Yi, depending on parameters вҗЈ . The exchangeable working correlation has corrЕҪYit , Yis. s вҗЈ for each pair in Yi. Let biЕҪвҗӘ. s ЕҪ bЕҪвҗӘi1., . . . , bЕҪвҗӘiTi.., and let Bi denote a diagonal matrix with main diagonal elements bYi ЕҪвҗӘ.. Then the working covariance matrix for Yi is

Vi

s

B i1r2

RЕҪ

вҗЈ

.

1r2
Bi вҗҫ

.

ЕҪ 11 .12.

Note that Vi s covЕҪYi. if R is the true correlation matrix for Yi. Now let вҢ¬ i be the diagonal matrix with elements СЁвҗӘitrСЁвҗ©it on the main
diagonal for t s 1, . . . , Ti. ЕҪFor the canonical link, this is the identity matrix.. Let Di s СЁ вҗ®irСЁ вҗӨ s Bi вҢ¬ i X i be a Ti = p matrix with typical element expressing СЁвҗ®itrСЁвҗӨj in the form ЕҪСЁвҗ®itrСЁвҗӘit .ЕҪСЁвҗӘitrСЁвҗ©it .ЕҪСЁвҗ©itrСЁвҗӨj.. From ЕҪ11.9., for univariate GLMs the quasi-likelihood estimating equations have the form

Гқ ЕҪ СЁвҗ®irСЁ вҗӨ .X В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . y1 yi y вҗ®i ЕҪ вҗӨ . s 0,
i

QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND ITS GEE MULTIVARIATE EXTENSIONS: DETAILS

473

where вҗ®i s вҗ®iЕҪвҗӨ. s gy1 ЕҪxXiвҗӨ.. The analog of this in the multivariate case is the set of generalized estimating equations

n
Гқ DiX Viy1 yi y вҗ®i ЕҪ вҗӨ . s 0.
is1

The GEE estimator вҗӨЛҶ is the solution of these equations.
The naive approach, which sets RЕҪвҗЈ . s I, treats pairs of responses as independent. In that case, ЕҪ11.12. simplifies to Vi s Biвҗҫ, and the generalized estimating equations simplify to

Гқ DiX Viy1 yi y вҗ®i ЕҪ вҗӨ .
i

s Гқ X iX вҢ¬ i BiViy1 yi y вҗ®i ЕҪ вҗӨ .
i
s ЕҪ1rвҗҫ . Гқ X iX вҢ¬ i yi y вҗ®i ЕҪ вҗӨ .
i

s 0,

or Гқi X iX вҢ¬ iwyi y вҗ®iЕҪвҗӨ.x s 0. The solution вҗӨЛҶ is then the same as the ordinary
estimator for a GLM with the chosen link function and variance function, treating ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yiTi. as independent observations.
Normally, one selects a working correlation matrix permitting dependence, such as the exchangeable structure. For time-series data, also popular is the autoregressive structure, corrЕҪYit , Yis. s вҗЈ < tys <, which treats observations farther apart in time as more weakly correlated. Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1986. suggested computing the GEE estimates by iterating between a modified Fisher scoring algorithm for solving the generalized estimating equations for вҗӨ ЕҪgiven current estimates of вҗЈ and вҗҫ . and using residuals for moment estimation of вҗЈ and вҗҫ ЕҪbased on the current estimates of вҗӨ.. They suggested estimates of RЕҪвҗЈ . for a variety of correlation structures. Alternative algorithms simultaneously solve estimating equations for вҗӨ and for association parameters ЕҪe.g., Liang et al. 1992; see also Note 11.8.. GEE algorithms need not converge, but often one iteration gives adequate results ЕҪLipsitz et al. 1991..
Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1986. showed asymptotic normality and consistency as the number of clusters n increases. Under certain regularity conditions,

'n ЕҪвҗӨЛҶ y вҗӨ . d NЕҪ0, VG . .

6

Here, generalizing ЕҪ11.11., VG s lim nв„ўПұ VG, n with

y1

VG , n s n Гқ DiX Viy1 Di

Гқ DiX Viy1 covЕҪ Yi . Viy1 Di

i

i

y1
Гқ DiX Viy1 Di .
i

The estimated covariance matrix VЛҶG, nrn of вҗӨЛҶ replaces вҗӨ with вҗӨЛҶ, вҗҫ with вҗҫЛҶ, вҗЈ with вҗЈЛҶ , and covЕҪYi. by wyi y вҗ®iЕҪвҗӨЛҶ .xwyi y вҗ®iЕҪвҗӨЛҶ .xX. The purpose of the

474

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

sandwich estimator is to use the dataвҖҷs empirical evidence about covariation

to adjust the standard errors in case the true covariance differs substantially

from the working guess.

When the working correlation structure is the true one and covЕҪYi. s Vi,

the

asymptotic

covariance

matrix

VG , nrn

simplifies

to

ЕҪГқi DXi

Vy1 D .y1.

i

i

This

is

the relevant covariance if we put complete faith in our guess about the

correlation structure.

With binary data, the correlation may not be the best way to express the

within-cluster association. The marginal probabilities constrain the possible correlation values, since the range of possible values for EЕҪYitYis. s PЕҪYit s 1, Yis s 1. depends on PЕҪYit s 1. and PЕҪYis s 1.. An alternative approach uses

the odds ratio, for instance by modeling the log odds ratios for pairs in a

cluster as exchangeable. This has the advantage that the association parameters are distinct from the means. See Fitzmaurice et al. ЕҪ1993. and Lipsitz et al. ЕҪ1991.. Carey et al. ЕҪ1993. suggested an iterative alternating logistic

regressions algorithm. It alternates between a GEE step for the regression

parameters in the model for the mean and a step for an association model for

the log odds ratio. This is useful when the structure of the association is itself

a major focus rather than a nuisance.

11.4.4 GEE Approach: Multinomial Responses We now briefly describe the Lipsitz et al. ЕҪ1994. GEE approach for marginal modeling with a multinomial response. This is appropriate, for instance, with cumulative logit models. Let yitЕҪ j. s 1 if observation t in cluster i has outcome j ЕҪ j s 1, . . . , I y 1.. Let yi be the TiЕҪ I y 1. binary indicators for cluster i. Then, one selects a wTiЕҪ I y 1.x = wTiЕҪ I y 1.x working covariance matrix Vi for yi, specifying a pattern for corrЕҪYitЕҪ j., YisЕҪ k.. for each pair of outcome categories ЕҪ j, k. and each pair ЕҪt, s.. The ЕҪ I y 1. = ЕҪ I y 1. block of Vit for ЕҪ yitЕҪ1., . . . , yitЕҪ I y 1.. is a multinomial covariance matrix with В®itЕҪ j. s PЕҪYitЕҪ j. s 1.w1 y PЕҪYitЕҪ j. s 1.x on the main diagonal and yPЕҪYitЕҪ j. s 1. PЕҪYitЕҪ k. s 1. off it. The remaining elements of Vi contain elements covЕҪYitЕҪ j., YisЕҪ k... For instance, one possibility is the exchangeable structure, corrЕҪYitЕҪ j., YisЕҪ k.. s вҗіjk for all t and s.
In this approach the generalized estimating equations for вҗӨ again have the form
n
uЕҪ вҗӨ . s Гқ DiX Viy1 ЕҪyi y вҗ®i . s 0,
is1

X

X

where вҗ®i is the vector of probabilities associated with yi, Di s СЁ вҗ®irСЁ вҗӨ, and

the parameters are evaluated at their current estimates. Lipsitz et al. sug-

gested a Fisher scoring algorithm for solving these equations and a method of moments update for estimating Г„ вҗіjk4 at each step of the iteration. An

QUASI-LIKELIHOOD AND ITS GEE MULTIVARIATE EXTENSIONS: DETAILS

475

empirically adjusted sandwich covariance matrix of вҗӨЛҶ is again

n

y1 n

Гқ DiX Viy1 Di

Гқ

DiX

Viy1 covЕҪ Yi

. Vy1
i

Di

is1

is1

n

y1

Гқ DiX Viy1 Di .

is1

This is estimated by substituting вҗ®ЛҶ i from the model fit and replacing covЕҪYi.
by the empirical covariance matrix of yi.

11.4.5 Dealing with Missing Data
Unfortunately, studies with repeated measurement often have cases for which at least one response in a cluster is missing. In a longitudinal study, for instance, some subjects may drop out before its conclusion. When data are missing, analyzing the observed data alone as if no data are missing can result in biased estimates.
An advantage of the GEE method is that different clusters can have different numbers of observations. The data input file has a separate line for each observation, and for longitudinal studies, computations use those times for which a subject has an observation. However, bias can arise in GEE estimates unless one can make certain assumptions about why the data are missing.
Let Y ЕҪo. denote the observed responses, Y ЕҪm. the missing responses, and Y their union. Let M denote a missing data indicator that equals 1 when an observation is missing and 0 otherwise. Little and Rubin ЕҪ1987. called the data missing completely at random if M is statistically independent of Y; that is, the probability that an observation is missing is independent of that observationвҖҷs value, although it may depend on the explanatory variables. Less restrictively, they called the data missing at random if the distribution of ЕҪ M < Y. equals that of ЕҪ M < Y ЕҪo..; that is, missingness depends only on Y ЕҪo. and not on the missing values.
When either of these is plausible, with a likelihood-based analysis it is not necessary to model the missingness mechanism. An analysis using only Y ЕҪo. is not systematically biased. The same is true with GEE methods when estimating equations can be weighted by response probabilities ЕҪRobins et al. 1995.. Otherwise, however, with non-likelihood-based methods such as GEE, the missingness process can be ignored only when data are missing completely at random. Kenward et al. ЕҪ1994. illustrated the breakdown in GEE estimates when the data are not missing completely at random.
Often, missingness depends on the missing values. For instance, in a longitudinal study measuring pain, perhaps a subject dropped out when the pain got above some threshhold. Then, more complex analyses are needed that model the joint distribution of Y and M ЕҪLittle 1998.. Let f ЕҪРё. denote a generic probability mass function, which also depends on explanatory variables x and parameters. Selection models factor the joint distribution of Y

476

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

and M as

fЕҪy, M; x, вҗӨ, вҗә. s fЕҪy; x, вҗӨ. f ЕҪ M < y; x, вҗә. ,

where f ЕҪy; x, вҗӨ. is the model in the absence of missing values and f ЕҪ M < y; x, вҗә. is the model for the missing-data mechanism. Pattern mixture models use the alternative factorization,

f ЕҪy, M; x, вҗӘ, вҗҫ. s f ЕҪy < M, x, вҗҫ. fЕҪ M; x, вҗӘ. ,

which conditions the distribution of Y on the missing data pattern. The two specifications are equivalent when M is independent of Y, with вҗӨ s вҗҫ and вҗә s вҗӘ. For discussion of advantages of each modeling approach and details on ways of modeling missingness, see Little ЕҪ1998. and references in Note 11.9. See Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000, p. 524. for an example of building the missingness pattern into a model to check whether it is associated with the response or interacts with effects of explanatory variables.
Analyses in the presence of much missingness should be made with caution. Typically, little is known about the missing data mechanism, and assumptions about it cannot be checked. Since inferences may not be robust, a sensitivity study is necessary to check how results depend on specification of that mechanism. In the absence of a model for the missingness, one should at least compare results of the analysis using all available cases for all clusters to the analysis using only clusters having no missing observations. If results differ substantially, conclusions should be very tentative until the reasons for missingness can be studied.

11.5 MARKOV CHAINS: TRANSITIONAL MODELING
When Yt denotes the response at time t, t s 0, 1, 2, . . . , the indexed family of random variables ЕҪY0, Y1, Y2 , . . . . is a stochastic process. The state space of the process is the set of possible values for Yt. The value Y0 is the initial state. When the state space is categorical and observations occur at a discrete set of times, Г„Yt4 has discrete state space and discrete time.
11.5.1 Transitional Models
The main focus is usually on the dependence of Yt on the responses Г„ y0, y1, . . . , yty14 observed previously as well as any explanatory variables. Models of this type are called transitional models. Let f ЕҪ y0, . . . , yT . denote the joint probability mass function of ЕҪY0, . . . , YT . ЕҪignoring, for now, ex-

MARKOV CHAINS: TRANSITIONAL MODELING

477

planatory variables.. Transitional models use the factorization
f ЕҪ y0 , . . . , yT . s f ЕҪ y0 . f ЕҪ y1 < y0 . f ЕҪ y2 < y0 , y1 . РёРёРё f ЕҪ yT < y0 , y1 , . . . , yTy1 . .

Unlike the marginal models in the other sections of this chapter, this modeling is conditional on previous responses.
In this section we introduce discrete-time MarkoВ® chains, a simple stochastic process having discrete state space. Many transitional models have Markov chain structure for at least part of the model.

11.5.2 First-Order Markov Chains
A MarkoВ® chain is a stochastic process for which, for all t, the conditional distribution of Ytq1 , given Y0, . . . , Yt, is identical to the conditional distribution of Ytq1 given Yt alone. That is, given Yt , Ytq1 is conditionally independent of Y0, . . . , Yty1. Knowing the present state of a Markov chain, information about past states does not help us predict the future. For Markov chains,
f ЕҪ y0 , . . . , yT . s f ЕҪ y0 . f ЕҪ y1 < y0 . f ЕҪ y2 < y1 . . . . f ЕҪ yT < yTy1 . . ЕҪ11.13.
A stochastic process is a kth-order MarkoВ® chain if, for all t, the conditional distribution of Ytq1 , given Y0, . . . , Yt, is identical to the conditional distribution of Ytq1 , given ЕҪYt , . . . , Ytykq1 .. Given the states at the previous k times, the future behavior of the chain is independent of past behavior before those k times. Our discussion here focuses mainly on ordinary Markov chains as in ЕҪ11.13., which are first order ЕҪ k s 1..
Denote the conditional probability PЕҪYt s j < Yty1 s i. by вҗІj<iЕҪt.. The Г„вҗІj<iЕҪt.4, which satisfy ГқjвҗІj<iЕҪt. s 1, are called transition probabilities. The I = I matrix Г„вҗІj<iЕҪt., i s 1, . . . , I, j s 1, . . . , I4 is a transition probability matrix. It is called one-step, to distinguish it from the matrix of probabilities for k-step transitions from time t y k to time t.
From ЕҪ11.13., the joint distribution for a Markov chain depends only on one-step transition probabilities and the marginal distribution for the initial state. It also follows that the joint distribution satisfies loglinear model
ЕҪ Y0Y1 , Y1Y2 , . . . , YTy1 YT . .
For a sample of realizations of a stochastic process, a contingency table displays counts of the possible sequences. A test of fit of this loglinear model checks whether the process plausibly satisfies the Markov property.
Statistical inference for Markov chains uses standard methods of categorical data analysis. For example, consider ML estimation of transition probabilities. Let ni jЕҪt. denote the number of transitions from state i at time t y 1 to state j at time t. For fixed t, Г„ni jЕҪt.4 form the two-way marginal table for dimensions t y 1 and t of an I Tq1 contingency table. For the niqЕҪt. subjects

478

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

in category i at time t y 1, suppose that Г„ni jЕҪt., j s 1, . . . , I4 have a multinomial distribution with parameters Г„вҗІj<iЕҪt.4. Let Г„ni04 denote the initial counts.

Suppose that they also have a multinomial distribution, with parameters Г„вҗІi04. If subjects behave independently, from ЕҪ11.13. the likelihood function is

proportional to

Еҫ / ВҪ I
ЕҒ вҗІ ni0i0
is1

TI
ЕҒЕҒ
ts1 is1

5 I ЕҪt.
ЕҒ вҗІj<iЕҪ t. nij .
js1

ЕҪ 11 .14.

The transition probabilities are parameters of IT independent multinomial distributions. From Anderson and Goodman ЕҪ1957., the ML estimates are
вҗІЛҶj<i ЕҪ t . s ni j ЕҪ t . rniq ЕҪ t . .

11.5.3 Respiratory Illness Example
Table 11.7 refers to a longitudinal study at Harvard of effects of air pollution on respiratory illness in children. The children were examined annually at ages 9 through 12 and classified according to the presence or absence of wheeze.
Denote the binary response ЕҪwheeze, no wheeze. by Yt at age t, t s 9, 10, 11, 12. The loglinear model ЕҪY9Y10 , Y10 Y11, Y11Y12 . represents a firstorder Markov chain. It fits poorly, with G2 s 122.9 ЕҪdf s 8.. Given the state at time t, classification at time t q 1 depends on states at times previous to time t. The model ЕҪY9Y10 Y11, Y10 Y11Y12 . represents a second-order Markov chain, satisfying conditional independence at ages 9 and 12, given states at ages 10 and 11. This model also fits poorly, with G2 s 23.9 ЕҪdf s 4.. The poor fits may partly reflect subject heterogeneity, since these analyses ignore possibly relevant covariates such as parental smoking behavior.
The loglinear model ЕҪY9Y10 , Y9Y11, Y9Y12 , Y10 Y11, Y10 Y12 , Y11Y12 . that permits association at each pair of ages fits well, with G2 s 1.5 ЕҪdf s 5.. Table

TABLE 11.7 Results of Breath Test at Four Agesa

Y9

Y10

Y11

Y12

Count

Y9

Y10

Y11

Y12

Count

1

1

1

1

94

2

1

1

1

19

1

1

1

2

30

2

1

1

2

15

1

1

2

1

15

2

1

2

1

10

1

1

2

2

28

2

1

2

2

44

1

2

1

1

14

2

2

1

1

17

1

2

1

2

9

2

2

1

2

42

1

2

2

1

12

2

2

2

1

35

1

2

2

2

63

2

2

2

2

572

a 1, wheeze; 2, no wheeze. Source: Ware et al. ЕҪ1988..

MARKOV CHAINS: TRANSITIONAL MODELING

479

TABLE 11.8 Estimated Conditional Log Odds Ratios for Table 11.7

Association

Estimate

Simpler Structure

Y9Y10 Y10Y11 Y11Y12 Y9Y11 Y9Y12 Y10Y12

1.81

1.75

1.65

1.75

1.85

1.75

0.95

1.04

1.05

1.04

1.07

1.04

11.8 shows its ML estimates of pairwise conditional log odds ratios. The association seems similar for pairs of ages 1 year apart, and somewhat weaker for pairs of ages more than 1 year apart. The simpler model in which

вҗӯY9Y10 s вҗӯY10 Y11 s вҗӯY11Y12

ij

ij

ij

and

вҗӯY9Y11 s вҗӯY9Y12 s вҗӯY10 Y12

ij

ij

ij

fits well, with G2 s 2.3 ЕҪdf s 9.. The estimated log odds ratios are 1.75 in the first case, and 1.04 in the second.

11.5.4 Transitional Models with Explanatory Variables Transitional models usually also include explanatory variables x. The joint mass function of T sequential responses is then
f ЕҪ y1, . . . , yT ; x.
s f ЕҪ y1; x. f ЕҪ y2 < y1; x. f ЕҪ y3 < y1 , y2 ; x. РёРёРё f ЕҪ yT < y1 , y2 , . . . , yTy1 ; x. .

With binary y, for instance, one might specify a logistic regression model for each term in this factorization,

f ЕҪ yt < y1 , . . . , yty1 ; x t .

X

exp yt ЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ1 y1 q РёРёРё qвҗӨty1 yty1 q вҗӨ x t .

s

X,

1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ1 y1 q РёРёРё qвҗӨty1 yty1 q вҗӨ x t .

yt s 0,1.

Here, the predictor x may take different value for each component. The model treats previous responses as explanatory variables. It is called a regressiВ®e logistic model ЕҪBonney 1987..
The interpretation and magnitude of вҗӨЛҶ depends on how many previous
observations are in the model. Within-cluster effects may diminish markedly

480

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

by conditioning on previous responses. This is an important difference from marginal models, for which the interpretation does not depend on the specification of the dependence structure. In the special case of first-order Markov structure, the coefficients of Г„ y1, . . . , yty2 4 equal 0 in the model for yt ЕҪe.g., Azzalini 1994; Bonney 1987.. It may help to allow interaction between x t and yty1 in their effects on yt.
For a given subject, the product of the conditional mass functions determines that subjectвҖҷs contribution to the likelihood function. ЕҪOne usually ignores the contribution of the marginal distribution for the first term.. That is, given the predictor, the model treats repeated transitions by a subject as independent. Thus, one can fit the model with ordinary GLM software, treating each transition as a separate observation ЕҪBonney 1986..

11.5.5 ChildвҖҷs Respiratory Illness and Maternal Smoking Table 11.9 is also from the Harvard study of air pollution and health. At ages 7 through 10, children were evaluated annually on the presence of respiratory illness. A predictor is maternal smoking at the start of the study, where s s 1 for smoking regularly and s s 0 otherwise. Let yt denote the response at age t ЕҪt s 7, 8, 9, 10.. We consider the regressive logistic model
logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 s q вҗӨ2 t q вҗӨ3 yty1 , t s 8, 9, 10.
Each subject contributes three observations to the model fitting. The data set consists of 12 binomials, for the 2 = 3 = 2 combinations of ЕҪ s, t, yty1 .. For instance, for the combination ЕҪ0, 8, 0., y8 s 0 for 237 q 10 q 15 q 4 s

TABLE 11.9 ChildвҖҷs Respiratory Illness by Age and Maternal Smoking

No Maternal Smoking

Maternal Smoking

ChildвҖҷs Respiratory Illness

Age 10

Age 10

Age 7

Age 8

Age 9

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

237

10

118

6

Yes

15

4

8

2

Yes

No

16

2

11

1

Yes

7

3

6

4

Yes

No

No

24

3

7

3

Yes

3

2

3

1

Yes

No

Yes

6

2

5

11

4

2

4

7

Source: Data courtesy of James Ware.

NOTES

481

266 subjects and y8 s 1 for 16 q 2 q 7 q 3 s 28 subjects. The ML fit is
logit PЛҶЕҪ Yt s 1. s y0.293 q 0.296 s y 0.243t q 2.211 yty1 ,
with SE values ЕҪ0.846, 0.156, 0.095, 0.158.. Not surprisingly, the previous observation has a strong effect. Given that and the childвҖҷs age, there is slight evidence of a positive effect of maternal smoking: The likelihood-ratio statistic for H0: вҗӨ1 s 0 is 3.55 ЕҪdf s 1, P s 0.06.. The model itself does not show any evidence of lack of fit ЕҪG2 s 3.1, df s 8..

NOTES
Section 11.1: Comparing Marginal Distributions: Multiple Responses
11.1. Darroch ЕҪ1981. surveyed thoroughly the relationships among statistics for testing marginal homogeneity and their connections with generalized CMH analyses. See also Mantel and Byar ЕҪ1978. and White et al. ЕҪ1982.. Croon et al. ЕҪ2000. studied a variety of hypotheses for longitudinal data in the context of the generalized loglinear model.

Section 11.2: Marginal Modeling: Maximum Likelihood Approach 11.2. For other work on ML fitting of marginal models, see Bergsma and Rudas ЕҪ2002., Ekholm et al. ЕҪ2000., Fitzmaurice et al. ЕҪ1993., and Lang et al. ЕҪ1999..

Section 11.3: Marginal Modeling: Generalized Estimating Equations Approach

11.3. 11.4. 11.5.

Liang et al. ЕҪ1992. discussed GEE methods for categorical ЕҪprimarily binary. responses. For multinomial responses, see Heagerty and Zeger ЕҪ1996., Lipsitz et al. ЕҪ1994., Miller et al. ЕҪ1993., and references in Agresti and Natarajan ЕҪ2001.. More general models with ordinal responses allow for dispersion parameters that also depend on covariates ЕҪToledano and Gatsonis 1996.. LaVange et al. ЕҪ2001. used GEE methods to adjust for clustered sampling in surveys and clinical trials. Boos ЕҪ1992. discussed generalized score tests that incorporate empirical variance estimates, illustrating with tests for trend and lack of fit in binary regression. Koch et al. ЕҪ1977. used weighted least squares ЕҪWLS. to fit marginal models to Table 11.2. WLS for categorical modeling is described in Section 15.1. It has severe limitations ЕҪe.g., covariates must be categorical and marginal tables cannot be sparse. but led naturally to the GEE approach.

Section 11.4: Quasi-likelihood and Its GEE MultiВ©ariate Extension: Details

11.6.

Firth ЕҪ1993b. provided a useful overview of quasi-likelihood methods. McCullagh ЕҪ1983. showed that under correct specification of the mean and the variance function, quasi-likelihood estimators are asymptotically efficient among estimators that are locally linear in Г„ yi4. His result generalizes the GaussбҺҗMarkov theorem, although in an asymptotic rather than exact manner. See also Heyde ЕҪ1997. and Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1995. for discussions of unbiased estimating functions and their connections with

482

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

asymptotic consistency and efficiency. Godambe showed in 1960 that ML estimators are optimal solutions with an unbiased estimating function. When quasi-likelihood estimators are not ML, Cox ЕҪ1983. and Firth ЕҪ1987. suggested that they still retain good efficiency when the departure from the natural exponential family is at most moderate, such as modest overdispersion relative to such a family.
11.7. The generalized estimating equations are likelihood equations, and hence the GEE estimates are also ML, in certain cases. Examples are multivariate normal data or binary data when the working covariance is correct ЕҪFitzmaurice et al. 1993.. Results about effects of model misspecification arise in a variety of model-building contexts. For general theory, see Gourieroux et al. ЕҪ1984., Hansen ЕҪ1982., Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1995., and White ЕҪ1982..
11.8. A GEE2 analysis adds estimating equations for the correlation structure ЕҪPrentice and Zhao 1991.. This has the potential to increase efficiency. A disadvantage is that,
unlike with ordinary GEE, вҗӨЛҶ is no longer consistent if this part of the model is
misspecified. Qu et al. ЕҪ2000. showed how to increase efficiency by representing the working correlation matrix by a linear combination of basis matrices. 11.9. For surveys of ways to handle missing data, see Little ЕҪ1998., Little and Rubin ЕҪ1987, Chap. 9., Schafer ЕҪ1997., and Verbeke and Molenberghs ЕҪ2000.. See also Baker and Laird ЕҪ1988., Fay ЕҪ1986., Fitzmaurice et al. ЕҪ1994., Forster and Smith ЕҪ1998., Fuchs ЕҪ1982., Molenberghs and Goetghebeur ЕҪ1997., Molenberghs et al. ЕҪ1997., Park and Brown ЕҪ1994., and Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000..

Section 11.5: MarkoВ© Chains: Transitional Modeling
11.10. For statistical inference with Markov chains, see Andersen ЕҪ1980, Sec. 7.7., Anderson and Goodman ЕҪ1957., Billingsley ЕҪ1961., Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, Chap. 7., and Kalbfleisch and Lawless ЕҪ1985.. See Conaway ЕҪ1989., Stiratelli et al. ЕҪ1984., and Ware et al. ЕҪ1988. for other analyses focusing on the conditional dependence structure.

PROBLEMS
Applications
11.1 Refer to Table 8.3. Viewing the table as matched triplets, construct the marginal distribution for each substance. Find the sample proportions of students who used marijuana, alcohol, and cigarettes. Test the hypothesis of marginal homogeneity. Interpret results.
11.2 Refer to Table 9.1. Fit a marginal model to describe main effects of race, gender, and substance type ЕҪmarijuana, alcohol, cigarettes. on whether a subject had used that substance. Summarize effects.
11.3 Refer to Problem 11.2. Further study shows evidence of an interaction between gender and substance type. Using GEE with exchangeable working correlation, the model fit for the probability вҗІ of using

PROBLEMS

483

a particular substance is
logitЕҪвҗІЛҶ . s y0.57 q 1.93S1 q 0.86S2 q 0.38 R
y 0.20G q 0.37G = S1 q 0.22G = S2 ,
where R, G, S1, S2 are dummy variables for race ЕҪ1 s white., gender ЕҪ1 s female., and substance type ЕҪS1 s 1, S2 s 0 for alcohol; S1 s 0, S2 s 1 for cigarettes; S1 s S2 s 0 for marijuana.. Show that: a. The estimated odds a nonwhite male has used marijuana are
expЕҪy0.57. s 0.57. b. Given gender, the estimated odds a white subject used a given
substance are 1.46 times the estimated odds for a black subject. c. Given race, the estimated odds a female has used alcohol are 1.19
times the estimated odds for males; for cigarettes and for marijuana, the estimated odds ratios are 1.02 and 0.82. d. Given race, the estimated odds a female has used alcohol ЕҪcigarettes. are 9.97 ЕҪ2.94. times the estimated odds she has used marijuana. e. Given race, the estimated odds a male has used alcohol ЕҪcigarettes. are 6.89 ЕҪ2.36. times the estimated odds he has used marijuana. Interpret the interaction.
11.4 Refer to Table 11.2. Analyze the data using the scores ЕҪ1, 2, 4. for the week number, using ML or GEE. Interpret estimates and compare substantive results to those in the text with scores ЕҪ0, 1, 2..

11.5 Analyze Table 11.9 using a marginal logit model with age and maternal smoking as predictors. Compare interpretations to the Markov model of Section 11.5.5.

11.6 Table 11.10 refers to a three-period crossover trial to compare placebo ЕҪtreatment A. with a low-dose analgesic ЕҪtreatment B. and high-dose analgesic ЕҪtreatment C. for relief of primary dysmenorrhea. Subjects in the study were divided randomly into six groups, the possible sequences for administering the treatments. At the end of each period, each subject rated the treatment as giving no relief ЕҪ0. or some relief ЕҪ1.. Let yiЕҪk.t s 1 denote relief for subject i using treatment t ЕҪt s A, B, C., where subject i is nested in treatment sequence k ЕҪ k s 1, . . . , 6.. Assuming common treatment effects for each se-
quence, and setting вҗӨA s 0, obtain and interpret Г„ вҗӨЛҶt4 ЕҪusing ML or
GEE. for the model
logit P ЕҪ YiЕҪk.t s 1. s вҗЈk q вҗӨt .
How would you order the drugs, taking significance into account?

484

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

TABLE 11.10 Data for Problem 11.6

Treatment

Response Pattern for Treatments ЕҪA, B, C.

Sequence 000 001 010 011 100 101 110 111

ABC

0

2

2

9

0

0

1

1

ACB

2

0

0

9

1

0

0

4

BAC

0

1

1

8

1

3

0

1

BCA

0

1

1

8

1

0

0

1

CAB

3

0

0

7

0

1

2

1

CBA

1

5

0

4

0

3

1

0

Source: Jones and Kenward ЕҪ1987..

11.7 Table 11.11 is from a Kansas State University survey of 262 pig farmers. For the question вҖҳвҖҳWhat are your primary sources of veterinary information?,вҖҷвҖҷ the categories were ЕҪA. professional consultant, ЕҪB. veterinarian, ЕҪC. state or local extension service, ЕҪD. magazines, and ЕҪE. feed companies and reps. Farmers sampled were asked to select all relevant categories. The 25 = 2 = 4 table shows the ЕҪyes, no. counts for each of these five sources cross-classified with the farmersвҖҷ education ЕҪwhether they had at least some college education. and size of farm ЕҪnumber of pigs marketed annually, in thousands..

TABLE 11.11 Data for Problem 11.7

Response on D

A s yes

A s no

B s yes

B s no

B s yes

B s no

C s yes C s no C s yes C s no C s yes C s no C s yes C s no

Educ Pigs E Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N

No - 1 Y 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 1 2 1 1 5 3 N0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 5 4 7 7 0
1бҺҗ2 Y 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 4 1 0 0 4 N0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 3 4 0
2бҺҗ5 Y 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 1 2 0 1 1 N1 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 1 4 0
)5 Y 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 2 N1 0 0 2 1 0 1 6 0 1 1 1 0 0 6 0
Some - 1 Y 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 1 1 0 0 2 11 N 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 1 2 4 6 14 0
1бҺҗ2 Y 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 1 6 N 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 2 1 0 4 2 7 14 0
2бҺҗ5 Y 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 3 N1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 4 4 0
)5 Y 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 N 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 10 0 0 0 4 1 2 4 0

Source: Data courtesy of Tom Loughin, Kansas State University.

PROBLEMS

485

a. Explain why it is not proper to analyze the data by fitting a multinomial model to the counts in the 2 = 4 = 5 contingency table cross-classifying education by size of farm by the source of
veterinary information, treating source as the response variable. ЕҪThis table contains 453 positive responses of sources from the 262 farmers.. b. For a farmer with education i and size of farm s, let вҗІjЕҪis. denote the probability of responding вҖҳвҖҳ yesвҖҷвҖҷ on the jth source. Table 11.12
shows output for using GEE with exchangeable working correla-
tion to estimate parameters in the model lacking an education
effect,

logit вҗІj ЕҪ is. s вҗЈj q вҗӨj s, s s 1, 2, 3, 4.

Explain how to interpret the working correlation matrix. Explain why the results suggest a strong positive size of farm effect for source A and perhaps a weak negative size effect of similar magnitude for C, D, and E.
c. Constraining вҗӨ3 s вҗӨ4 s вҗӨ5, the ML estimate of the common slope is y0.184 ЕҪSE s 0.063.. Explain why it is advantageous to fit the marginal model simultaneously for all sources rather than separately to each. wAgresti and Liu ЕҪ1999. and Loughin and Scherer ЕҪ1998. discussed analyses for data of this form.x

TABLE 11.12 Output for Problem 11.7

Row1 Row2 Row3 Row4 Row5

Col1 1.0000 0.0997 0.0997 0.0997 0.0997

Working Correlation Matrix

Col2

Col3

Col4

0.0997

0.0997

0.0997

1.0000

0.0997

0.0997

0.0997

1.0000

0.0997

0.0997

0.0997

1.0000

0.0997

0.0997

0.0997

Parameter source source source source source size*source size*source size*source size*source size*source

Analysis Of GEE Parameter Estimates

Empirical Standard Error Estimates

Estimate

Std Error

Z

1

y4.4994

0.6457

y6.97

2

y0.8279

0.2809

y2.95

3

y0.1526

0.2744

y0.56

4

0.4875

0.2698

1.81

5

y0.0808

0.2738

y0.30

1

1.0812

0.1979

5.46

2

0.0792

0.1105

0.72

3

y0.1894

0.1121

y1.69

4

y0.2206

0.1081

y2.04

5

y0.2387

0.1126

y2.12

Col5 0.0997 0.0997 0.0997 0.0997 1.0000
Pr><Z < <.0001 0.0032 0.5780 0.0708 0.7680 <.0001 0.4738 0.0912 0.0412 0.0341

486

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

TABLE 11.13 Output for Problem 11.8

Parameter Intercept question 1 question 2 question 3 female

Row1 Row2 Row3

Working Correlation Matrix

Col1

Col2

Col3

1.0000

0.8173

0.8173

0.8173

1.0000

0.8173

0.8173

0.8173

1.0000

Analysis Of GEE Parameter Estimates

Empirical Standard Error Estimates

Estimate

Std Error

Z

y0.1253

0.0676

y1.85

0.1493

0.0297

5.02

0.0520

0.0270

1.92

0.0000

0.0000

.

0.0034

0.0878

0.04

Pr><Z < 0.0637 <.0001 0.0544
. 0.9688

11.8 Refer to Table 11.13 on attitudes toward legalized abortion. For the response Yt ЕҪ1 s support legalization, 0 s oppose. for question t ЕҪt s 1, 2, 3. and for gender g ЕҪ1 s female, 0 s male., consider the model logitw PЕҪYt s 1.x s вҗЈ q вҗҘ g q вҗӨt with вҗӨ3 s 0. a. A GEE analysis using unstructured working correlation gives correlation estimates 0.826 for questions 1 and 2, 0.797 for 1 and 3, and 0.832 for 2 and 3. What does this suggest about a reasonable working correlation structure?
b. Table 11.13 shows a GEE analysis with exchangeable working correlation. Interpret effects.
c. Treating the three responses for each subject as independent
observations and performing ordinary logistic regression, вҗӨЛҶ1 s 0.149 ЕҪSE s 0.066., вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.052 ЕҪSE s 0.066., and вҗҘЛҶ s 0.004 ЕҪSE
s 0.054.. Give a heuristic explanation of why within-subject standard errors are much larger than with GEE, yet the between-subject standard error is smaller.

11.9 Refer to the air pollution data in Table 11.7. Using ML or GEE, fit marginal logit models that assume ЕҪa. marginal homogeneity, ЕҪb. a linear effect of time, and ЕҪc. no pattern. Interpret and compare.

11.10

Refer to the clinical trials data in Table 12.5, analyzed with random effects models in Section 12.3.4. Use GEE methods to analyze them, treating each center as a correlated cluster.

11.11

Refer to Table 10.5. Using GEE methods with cumulative logits, compare the two marginal distributions. Compare results to those using ML in Section 10.3.2.

11.12 Refer to the 34 table on government spending in Table 8.19. Analyze these data with a marginal cumulative logit model. Interpret effects.

PROBLEMS

487

11.13

Refer to Table 11.4.
a. To compare effects while controlling for initial response, fit model ЕҪ11.7., using scores Г„10, 25, 45, 754 for time to falling asleep. Also fit the interaction model, and describe the lack of fit. ЕҪNote that for the first two baseline levels, the active and placebo treatments have similar sample response distributions at the follow-up; at higher baseline levels, the active treatment seems more successful..
b. Fit the interaction model

logit P ЕҪ Y2 F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1 x q вҗӨ2 y1 q вҗӨ3 xy1

that constrains effects Г„ вҗӨ1 x q вҗӨ2 y1 q вҗӨ3 xy14 to follow the pattern ЕҪвҗ¶ , вҗ¶ , вҗӯ q вҗҙ , вҗӯ. for the active group and ЕҪвҗ¶ , вҗ¶ , вҗҙ , 0. for the placebo
group. Interpret вҗӯЛҶ.

11.14

Find a marginal model with another type of logit that fits the insomnia data of Table 11.4 well. Interpret parameter estimates, and compare conclusions to those using cumulative logits.

11.15

Refer to Table 11.9. Combine the data for the two levels of maternal smoking. Does a first-order Markov chain model these data adequately? Find a loglinear model that does fit adequately.

11.16

Analyze Table 11.9 using a transitional model with two previous responses. Does it fit better than the first-order model of Section 11.5.5? Interpret.

11.17 Analyze Table 11.2 using a first-order transitional model. Compare interpretations to those in this chapter using marginal models.

11.18

Table 11.14 is from a longitudinal study of coronary risk factors in schoolchildren ЕҪWoolson and Clarke 1984.. A sample of children aged 11бҺҗ13 in 1977 were classified by gender and by relative weight ЕҪobese, not obese. in 1977, 1979, and 1981. Analyze these data.

TABLE 11.14 Data for Problem 11.18

Responses a

Gender NNN NNO NON NOO ONN ONO OON OOO

Male

119

7

8

3

13

4

11

16

Female 129

8

7

9

6

2

7

14

aNNN indicates not obese in 1977, 1979, and 1981; NNO indicates not obese in 1977 and 1979
but obese in 1981; and so on. Source: Reproduced with permission from the Royal Statistical Society, London ЕҪWoolson and Clarke 1984..

488

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

11.19 Refer to the pig farmer survey of Problem 11.7 ЕҪTable 11.11.. Analyze these data using marginal models with all the variables.

11.20 Refer to the cereal diet and cholesterol study of Problem 7.18 ЕҪTable 7.23.. Analyze these data with marginal models.

Theory and Methods

11.21

Refer to Problem 11.1. Suppose that we expressed the data with a 3 = 2 partial table of drug-by-response for each subject, to use a generalized CMH procedure to test marginal homogeneity. Explain why the 911 q 279 subjects who make the same response for every drug have no effect on the test.

11.22

Let yit s 1 or 0 for observation t on subject i, i s 1, . . . , n, t s 1, . . . , T. Let y.t s Гқi yitrn, yi.s Гқt yitrT, and y. .s ГқiГқt yitrnT. a. Regard Г„ yiq4 as fixed. Suppose that each way to allocate the yiq
вҖҳвҖҳsuccessesвҖҷвҖҷ to yiq of the observations is equally likely. Show that EЕҪYit . s yi. , varЕҪYit . s yi.ЕҪ1 y yi.., and covЕҪYit , Yik . s yyi.ЕҪ1 y yi..rЕҪT y 1. for t / k. w Hint: The covariance is the same for any pair of cells in the same row, and varЕҪГқtYit . s 0 since yiq is fixed.x b. Refer to part ЕҪa.. For large n with independent subjects, explain why ЕҪY.1, . . . , Y.T . is approximately multivariate normal with pairwise correlation вҗі s y1rЕҪT y 1.. Conclude that CochranвҖҷs Q statistic ЕҪCochran 1950.

n2 ЕҪ T y 1. Гқts1 T ЕҪ y.t y y. . . 2

Qs

T Гқis1 n yi.ЕҪ 1 y yi. .

11.23

is approximately chi-squared with df s ЕҪT y 1.. wOne way notes that if ЕҪ X1, . . . , XT . is multivariate normal with common mean and common variance вҗҙ 2 and common correlation вҗі for pairs ЕҪ Xt, Xk ., then ГқЕҪ Xt y X .2rвҗҙ 2ЕҪ1 y вҗі . is chi-squared with df s ЕҪT y 1.. See Bhapkar and Somes ЕҪ1977. for slightly weaker conditions for a chi-squared limiting distribution for Q than those in part ЕҪa..x c. Show that Q is unaffected by deleting cases in which yi1 s РёРёРё s yiT .
Consider the model вҗ®i s вҗӨ, i s 1, . . . , n, assuming that В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗ®i. Suppose that actually varЕҪYi. s вҗ®i2. Using the univariate version of GEE described in Section 11.4, show that uЕҪвҗӨ. s ГқiЕҪ yi y вҗӨ .rвҗӨ and
вҗӨЛҶs y. Show that V in ЕҪ11.10. equals вҗӨrn, the actual asymptotic
variance ЕҪ11.11. simplifies to вҗӨ 2rn, and its consistent estimate is ГқiЕҪ yi y y.2rn2.

PROBLEMS

489

11.24 Repeat Problem 11.23 assuming that В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҙ 2 when actually varЕҪYi. s вҗ®i.

11.25

Consider the model вҗ®i s вҗӨ, i s 1, . . . , n, for independent Poisson
observations. For вҗӨЛҶs y, show that the model-based asymptotic vari-
ance estimate is yrn, whereas the robust estimate of the asymptotic variance is ГқiЕҪ yi y y.2rn2. Which would you expect to be better ЕҪa. if the Poisson model holds, and ЕҪb. if there is severe overdispersion?

11.26 Show that ЕҪ11.10. is equivalent to the formula for the large-sample covariance of the ML estimator in a GLM, estimated by ЕҪ4.28..

11.27

a. For a univariate response, how is quasi-likelihood ЕҪQL. inference different from ML inference? When are they equivalent?
b. Explain the sense in which GEE methodology is a multivariate version of QL.
c. Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of the QL approach.
d. Describe conditions under which GEE parameter estimators are consistent and conditions under which they are not. For conditions in which they are consistent, explain why.

11.28 Formulate a model using adjacent-categories logits or continuationratio logits that is analogous to ЕҪ11.4.. Interpret parameters.

11.29

Refer to the analysis of mean time to falling asleep at the end of Section 11.2.3. Explain how to calculate SE for the difference between the difference of means reported there. ЕҪNote that one difference uses paired samples and the other uses independent samples..

11.30 11.31

What is wrong with this statement?: вҖҳвҖҳFor a first-order Markov chain, Yt is independent of Yty2 .вҖҷвҖҷ
Suppose that loglinear model ЕҪY0, Y1, . . . , YT . holds. Is this a Markov chain?

11.32

Gamblers A and B have a total of I dollars. They play games of pool
repeatedly. Each game they each bet $1, and the winner takes the
otherвҖҷs dollar. The outcomes of the games are statistically independent, and A has probability вҗІ and B has probability 1 y вҗІ of winning
any game. Play stops when one player has all the money. Let Yt denote AвҖҷs monetary total after t games. a. Show that Г„Yt4 is a first-order Markov chain. b. State the transition probability matrix. ЕҪFor this gamblerвҖҷs ruin
problem, 0 and I are absorbing states. Eventually, the chain enters one of these and stays. The other states are transient..

490

ANALYZING REPEATED CATEGORICAL RESPONSE DATA

11.33

A first-order Markov chain has stationary ЕҪor time-homogeneous. transition probabilities if the one-step transition probability matrices are identical, that is, if for all i and j,
вҗІ j<i ЕҪ1. s вҗІ j<i ЕҪ 2. s РёРёРё s вҗІ j<i ЕҪ T . s вҗІ j<i .

Let X, Y, and Z denote the classifications for the I = I = T table consisting of Г„ni jЕҪt., i s 1, . . . , I, j s 1, . . . , I, t s 1, . . . , T 4.
a. Explain why all transition probabilities are stationary if expected frequencies for this table satisfy loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ.. wThus, the likelihood-ratio statistic for testing stationary transition probabilities equals G2 for testing fit of model ЕҪ XY, XZ..x
b. Let ni j s Гқt ni jЕҪt.. Under the assumption of stationary transition probabilities, show how the likelihood in ЕҪ11.14. simplifies, and show that the ML estimators are

вҗІЛҶj< i s ni jrniq.

c. For a Markov chain with stationary transition probabilities, let yi jk denote the number of transitions from i to j to k over two successive steps. For Г„ yi jk4, argue that the goodness of fit of loglinear model ЕҪY1Y2 , Y2Y3. tests that the chain is first order against the alternative that it is second order ЕҪAnderson and Goodman 1957..

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 12
Random Effects: Generalized Linear Mixed Models for Categorical Responses
In Chapter 11 we noted that observations often occur in clusters. For instance, cluster i might consist of repeated measurements on subject i or observations for all subjects in family i. Observations within a cluster tend to be more alike than observations from different clusters. Thus, they are usually positively correlated. Ordinary analyses that ignore the correlation and treat within-cluster observations the same as between-cluster observations produce invalid standard errors.
In Chapter 11 we focused on modeling the marginal distributions of clustered responses, treating the joint dependence structure as a nuisance. In this chapter we present an alternative approach using cluster-level terms in the model. These terms take the same value for each observation in a cluster but different values for different clusters. They are unobserved and, when treated as varying randomly among clusters, are called random effects. In Section 10.2.4 we introduced this approach in a model for matched pairs. The models have conditional interpretations, referred to as subjectspecific when each cluster is a subject. This contrasts with marginal models, which have population-aВ®eraged interpretations.
Random effects models for normal responses are well established. By contrast, only recently have random effects been used much in models for categorical data. In this chapter we extend generalized linear models to include random effects. In Section 12.1 we introduce this extension, the generalized linear mixed model. In Section 12.2 we discuss an important special case for binary data, the logistic-normal model. Several examples are shown in Section 12.3. Section 12.4 covers extensions for multinomial responses, and Section 12.5 covers models with multivariate random effects. In Section 12.6 we discuss model fitting, assuming normality for the random effects. Parts of this chapter are from Agresti et al. ЕҪ2000..
491

492

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

12.1 RANDOM EFFECTS MODELING OF CLUSTERED CATEGORICAL DATA

Parameters that describe a factorвҖҷs effects in ordinary linear models are called fixed effects. They apply to all categories of interest, such as genders, age groupings, or treatments. By contrast, random effects usually apply to a sample. For a study using a sample of clinics, for example, the model treats observations from a given clinic as a cluster, and it has a random effect for each clinic.
GLMs extend ordinary regression by allowing nonnormal responses and a link function of the mean. The generalized linear mixed model ЕҪGLMM. is a further extension that permits random effects as well as fixed effects in the linear predictor.

12.1.1 Generalized Linear Mixed Model
Let yit denote observation t in cluster i, t s 1, . . . , Ti. As in the GEE analyses in Chapter 11, the number of observations may vary by cluster. In a longitudinal study, even if clusters have equal size, many of them may have missing observations. Let x it denote a column vector of values of explanatory variables, for fixed effect model parameters вҗӨ. Let u i denote the vector of random effect values for cluster i. This is common to all observations in the cluster. Let z it denote a column vector of their explanatory variables. Often, the random effect is univariate.
Conditional on u i, a GLMM resembles an ordinary GLM. Let вҗ®it s EЕҪYit < u i.. The linear predictor for a GLMM has the form

g ЕҪ вҗ®it . s x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i

ЕҪ 12 .1.

for link function gЕҪРё.. The random effect vector u i is assumed to have a multivariate normal distribution NЕҪ0, вҢә.. The covariance matrix вҢә depends
on unknown В®ariance components and possibly also correlation parameters. Denote varЕҪYit < u i. s вҗҫitВ®ЕҪвҗ®it . , where the variance function В®ЕҪРё. describes
how the ЕҪconditional. variance depends on the mean. As in Section 4.4, often вҗҫit s 1 or вҗҫit s вҗҫrвҗ»it , where вҗ»it is a known weight ЕҪe.g., number of trials for a binomial count. and вҗҫ is an unknown dispersion parameter. Conditional on u i, the model treats Г„ yit4 as independent over i and t. As discussed in Section 10.2.2, the variability among u i induces a nonnegative association among the responses, for the marginal distribution averaged over the sub-
jects. This is caused by the shared random effect u i for each observation in a cluster.
In ЕҪ12.1., the random effect enters the model on the same scale as the
predictor terms. This is convenient but also natural for many applications.
For instance, random effects sometimes represent heterogeneity caused by

RANDOM EFFECTS MODELING OF CLUSTERED CATEGORICAL DATA

493

omitting certain explanatory variables. Consider the special case with univariate random effect and zit s 1. With ui replaced by ui*вҗҙ where Г„ui*4 are NЕҪ0, 1., the GLMM has the form
g ЕҪ вҗ®it . s x itX вҗӨ q ui*вҗҙ .
This has the form of an ordinary GLM with unobserved values Г„ui*4 of a particular covariate. Thus, random effects models relate to methods of dealing with unmeasured predictors and other forms of missing data. The random effects part of the linear predictor reflects terms that would be in the fixed effects part if those explanatory variables had been included. Random effects also sometimes represent random measurement error in the explanatory variables. If we replace a particular predictor xit by xit* q в‘Җi, with xit* the true value and в‘Җi the measurement error, then в‘Җi times the regression parameter can be absorbed in the random effects term. Related to these motivations, random effects also provide a mechanism for explaining overdispersion in basic models not having those effects ЕҪBreslow and Clayton 1993..

12.1.2 Logit GLMM for Binary Matched Pairs We illustrate the GLMM expression ЕҪ12.1. using a simple case, that of binary matched pairs. The data form two dependent binomial samples ЕҪSection 10.1.. Cluster i consists of the responses ЕҪ yi1, yi2 . for matched pair i. Observation t in cluster i has yit s 1 ЕҪa success. or 0 ЕҪa failure., t s 1, 2.
In Section 10.2.2 we introduced the model ЕҪCox 1958b, Rasch 1961.

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1. s вҗЈi q вҗӨ xt

ЕҪ 12 .2.

where x1 s 0 and x2 s 1. For it, вҗӨ is a cluster-specific log odds ratio. That section treated вҗЈi as a fixed effect and eliminated it using conditional ML. An equivalent representation of ЕҪ12.2. is

logit P ЕҪ Yi1 s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q ui ,

logit P ЕҪ Yi2 s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ q ui ,
ЕҪ 12 .3.

where ui s вҗЈi y вҗЈ for some constant вҗЈ. Now, we treat ui as a random effect for cluster i, with Г„ui4 independent from a NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . distribution with вҗҙ unknown. Conditionally on ui, we assume that yi1 and yi2 are independent.
Model ЕҪ12.3. is the special case of ЕҪ12.1. in which вҗ®it s PЕҪYit s 1 < ui., gЕҪРё. is the logit link, вҗӨX s ЕҪ вҗЈ , вҗӨ ., x i1X s ЕҪ1, 0. and x i2X s ЕҪ1, 1. for all i, and zit s 1 for all i and t. The univariate random effect adjusts the intercept but does
not modify the fixed effect. A GLMM with random effect of this form is called a random intercept model. Instead of the usual fixed intercept вҗЈ , it has a random intercept вҗЈ q ui.

494

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

Let Y1 s Гқi yi1 and Y2 s Гқi yi2. Marginally, Y1 is binomial with n trials and parameter EГ„expЕҪ вҗЈ q U .rw1 q expЕҪ вҗЈ q U .x4, and Y2 is binomial with parameter EГ„expЕҪ вҗЈ q вҗӨ q U .rw1 q expЕҪ вҗЈ q вҗӨ q U .x4. The expectations refer to U, a NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . random variable. The model implies a nonnegative correlation between Y1 and Y2 , with greater association resulting from greater heterogeneity ЕҪi.e., larger вҗҙ .. Clusters with a large positive ui have a relatively large PЕҪYit s 1 < ui. for each t, whereas clusters with a large negative ui have a relatively small PЕҪYit s 1 < ui. for each. For this model, Y1 and Y2 are independent only if вҗҙ s 0.
A 2 = 2 population-averaged table with ЕҪsuccess, failure. for both the row and column categories summarizes the number of observations for which ЕҪ yi1, yi2 . s ЕҪ1, 1., ЕҪ1, 0., ЕҪ0, 1., or ЕҪ0, 0.. Let Г„ nab4 denote these counts. Table
12.1, analyzed first in Section 10.1, is an example. Let Г„вҗ®ЛҶab4 denote marginal
fitted values for model ЕҪ12.3.. We defer discussion of model fitting until Section 12.6. However, model ЕҪ12.3. is a rare instance in which the fixed effect in a random effects model has a closed-form ML estimate,
вҗӨЛҶs logЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ21rвҗ®ЛҶ12 . .
When the sample log odds ratio logЕҪ n11 n22rn12 n21 . G 0, then Г„вҗ®ЛҶab s nab4 and вҗӨЛҶs logЕҪ n21rn12 .. This is the same as the conditional ML estimate
ЕҪSection 10.2.3.. Neuhaus et al. ЕҪ1994. showed that this is true for any parametric choice of random effects distribution for which the model ЕҪ12.3. can generate Г„nab4 as fitted values. Lindsay et al. ЕҪ1991. showed that this estimate also results with a nonparametric approach discussed in Section 13.2.4. The model implies that the true log odds ratio for this 2 = 2 table
is at least 0. When logЕҪ n11 n22rn12 n21. - 0, however, then вҗҙЛҶ s 0 and the fitted values Г„вҗ®ЛҶab s naqnqbrn4 satisfy independence. Then, вҗӨЛҶ is identical
to the estimate for the marginal model ЕҪ10.6. by which вҗӨ is the dif-
ference between logits for the two marginal distributions, namely вҗӨЛҶs
logwЕҪ n2qnq1 .rЕҪ n1qnq2 .x.

12.1.3 Ratings of Prime Minister Revisited For Table 12.1, the ML fit of model ЕҪ12.3., treating Г„ui4 as normal, yields
вҗӨЛҶs logЕҪ86r150. s y0.556 ЕҪSE s 0.135., with вҗҙЛҶ s 5.16. This is identical to
the conditional ML estimate ЕҪ10.10., with standard error wЕҪ1r86. q ЕҪ1r150.x1r2 . For a given subject, the estimated odds of approval at the second

TABLE 12.1
First Survey
Approve Disapprove
Total

Rating of Performance of Prime Minister

Second Survey

Approve

Disapprove

Total

794

150

944

86

570

656

880

720

1600

RANDOM EFFECTS MODELING OF CLUSTERED CATEGORICAL DATA

495

survey equal expЕҪy0.556. s 0.57 times those at the first survey. The large вҗҙЛҶ
reflects the very strong association between the two responses, with sample
odds ratio 35.1.

12.1.4 Extension: Rasch Model and Item Response Models
An extension of the logit matched-pairs model ЕҪ12.3. allows T ) 2 observations in each cluster. The random intercept model then has form

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s ui q вҗӨt ,

ЕҪ 12 .4.

where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. Equivalently, the model can add an intercept вҗЈ or let EЕҪui. s вҗЈ , but then identifiability requires a constraint such as вҗӨT s 0.
Early applications of this GLMM were in psychometrics. The model
describes responses to a battery of T questions on an exam. The probability PЕҪYit s 1 < ui. that subject i makes the correct response on question t depends on the overall ability of subject i, characterized by ui, and the easiness of question t, characterized by вҗӨt. Such models are called item-response models. The logit form ЕҪ12.4. is called the Rasch model ЕҪRasch 1961.. In estimating Г„вҗӨt4, Rasch treated Г„ui4 as fixed effects and used conditional ML, as outlined in Section 10.2.3 for matched pairs. Later authors used the
normal random effects approach for this model and the model with probit link ЕҪe.g., Bock and Aitkin 1981..
The Г„вҗӨt4 in the Rasch model differ from parameters in corresponding marginal models such as ЕҪ11.1., since the effects are subject specific. The Rasch model refers to a T = 2 = n table of observation by outcome by subject, whereas the marginal model refers to the T = 2 observation-by-
outcome table of the T marginal distributions, collapsed over subjects. For observations s and t for a given subject i with model ЕҪ12.4.,

вҗӨs y вҗӨt s logit P ЕҪ Yis s 1< ui . y logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1< ui . ,

which is a log odds ratio conditional on the subject. By contrast, the corresponding population-averaged effect in marginal model ЕҪ11.1. is
вҗӨs y вҗӨt s logit P ЕҪ Yhs s 1. y logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1. ,

with subject h randomly selected for observation s and subject i randomly selected for observation t ЕҪi.e., h and i are independent observations..

12.1.5 Random Effects versus Conditional ML Approaches
Suppose that one treated Г„ui4 in model ЕҪ12.4. as fixed effects instead of random effects. Then, consider ordinary ML estimation of Г„вҗӨt4 and Г„ui4. As n increases, so does the number of parameters, since each subject has a ui.

496

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

Even though the number of Г„вҗӨt4 does not increase as n does, the ordinary
ML estimators Г„вҗӨЛҶt4 are not consistent. This happens in many models when
the number of parameters has an order similar to that of the number of subjects. Asymptotic optimality properties of ML estimators, such as consistency, require the number of parameters to be fixed as n increases. For model ЕҪ12.4., ML estimators of Г„вҗӨt4 have bias of order TrЕҪT y 1. ЕҪAndersen
1980, pp. 244бҺҗ245.. For the matched-pairs model ЕҪ12.2., for instance, вҗӨЛҶв„ў 2 вҗӨ
in probability ЕҪProblem 10.24.. For this reason, the preferable approach for the fixed effects model is
conditional ML. One eliminates Г„ui4 by conditioning on their sufficient statistics Г„Si s Гқt yit, i s 1, . . . , n4. In the item response context, these are the numbers of correct responses for each subject. Conditional on Г„Si4, the distribution of Г„ yit4 is independent of Г„ui4. Maximizing the resulting likelihood then yields consistent estimators of Г„вҗӨt4. The analysis generalizes the one in Section 10.2.3 for the subject-specific logistic model ЕҪ10.8. for matched pairs. See Andersen ЕҪ1980. for details.
Compared with the random effects approach, the conditional ML approach has certain advantages. One does not need to assume a parametric distribution for Г„ui4. It is difficult to check this assumption in the random effects approach. Conditional ML is also appropriate with retrospective sampling. In that case, bias can occur with a random effects approach because the clusters are not randomly sampled ЕҪNeuhaus and Jewell 1990b..
However, the conditional ML approach has severe disadvantages. It is restricted to the canonical link ЕҪthe logit., for which reduced sufficient statistics exist for Г„ui4. More important, as discussed in Section 10.2.7, it is restricted to inference about within-cluster fixed effects. The conditioning removes the source of variability needed for estimating between-cluster effects in models with explanatory variables such as those considered next. Also, this approach does not provide information about Г„ui4, such as predictions of their values and estimates of their variability or of the probabilities they determine. Finally, in more general models with covariates, conditional ML can be less efficient than the random effects approach for estimating the fixed effects ЕҪsee Note 12.2..

12.2 BINARY RESPONSES: LOGISTIC-NORMAL MODEL

The item response model ЕҪ12.4. with random intercept is a special case of an important class of random effects models for binary data called logisticnormal models. With univariate random effect, the model form is

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s x itX вҗӨ q ui

ЕҪ 12 .5.

where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . variates. This is the special case of the GLMM ЕҪ12.1. in which gЕҪРё. is the logit link and the random effects structure

BINARY RESPONSES: LOGISTIC-NORMAL MODEL

497

simplifies to a random intercept. The logistic-normal model has a long history, dating at least to Cox ЕҪ1970, Prob. 20 in that text. for the matchedpairs model ЕҪ12.3. and Pierce and Sands ЕҪ1975..
More generally, the link function in model ЕҪ12.5. can be an arbitrary inverse cdf. For such models, Yis and Yit are treated conditionally ЕҪgiven ui. as independent but are marginally nonnegatively correlated. Let вҢҪ denote
the cdf that is the inverse link function. Then, for s / t,

covЕҪ Yis , Yit . s E covЕҪ Yis , Yit < ui . q cov E ЕҪ Yis < ui . , E ЕҪ Yit < ui .

s 0 q cov вҢҪ ЕҪx isX вҗӨ q ui . , вҢҪ ЕҪx itX вҗӨ q ui . .

ЕҪ 12 .6.

The functions in the last covariance term are both monotone increasing in ui, and hence are nonnegatively correlated. For common predictor value x at each t, the joint distribution for the model is exchangeable. This is often plausible for clustered data. In longitudinal studies, however, observations closer together in time may tend to be more highly correlated.
Usually, the main focus in using a GLMM is inference about the fixed effects. The random effects part of the model is a mechanism for representing how the positive correlation occurs between observations within a cluster. Parameters pertaining to the random effects may themselves be of interest,
however. For instance, the estimate вҗҙЛҶ of the standard deviation of a random
intercept may be a useful summary of the degree of heterogeneity of a population.

12.2.1 Interpreting Heterogeneity in Logistic-Normal Models
When вҗҙ s 0, the logistic-normal model ЕҪ12.5. simplifies to the ordinary logistic regression model treating all observations as independent. When вҗҙ ) 0, how can we interpret the variability in effects this model implies?
Consider observation yit at setting x it of predictors and observation yhs at setting x hs. Their log odds ratio is
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . y logit P ЕҪ Yhs s 1 < uh . s ЕҪx it y x hs .XвҗӨ q ЕҪ ui y uh . .

We cannot observe ЕҪui y uh., which has a NЕҪ0, 2 вҗҙ 2 .distribution. However, 100ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ .% of those log odds ratios fall within

ЕҪ x it y x h s .XвҗӨ " zвҗЈ r2 '2 вҗҙ .

ЕҪ 12 .7.

When вҗҙ s 0, ЕҪx it y x hs.РҲвҗӨ is the usual form of log odds ratio for a model without random effects. When вҗҙ ) 0, ЕҪx it y x hs.XвҗӨ is the log odds ratio for two observations in the same cluster ЕҪ h s i. or with the same random effect
value. Suppose that x it s x hs for observations from different clusters. Then, using z0.25 s 0.674, the middle 50% of the log odds ratios fall within

498

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

"0.674'2 вҗҙ s "0.95вҗҙ . Hence, the median odds ratio between the observa-
tion with higher random effect and the observation with lower random effect equals expЕҪ0.95вҗҙ .. With a single predictor and xit y xhs s 1, the median such odds ratio equals expЕҪ вҗӨ q 0.95вҗҙ .. Larsen et al. ЕҪ2000. presented related interpretations.

12.2.2 Connections between Conditional Models and Marginal Models
The fixed effects parameters вҗӨ in GLMMs have conditional intepretations, given the random effect. Those fixed effects are of two types. First, consider an explanatory variable that varies in value among observations in a cluster. For instance, in a crossover study comparing T drugs, for each subject the drug taken varies from observation to observation in that subjectвҖҷs cluster of T observations. For such an explanatory variable, its coefficient in the model refers to the effect on the response of a within-cluster ЕҪe.g., subject-specific. 1-unit increase of that predictor. The random effect as well as other explanatory variables in the model are constant while that predictor increases by 1. The effect of that explanatory variable is a вҖҳвҖҳ within-clusterвҖҷвҖҷ or вҖҳвҖҳ within-subjectвҖҷвҖҷ one.
Second, consider an explanatory variable with constant value among observations in a cluster. An example is gender when each subject forms a cluster. For such an explanatory variable, its coefficient refers to the effect on the response of a вҖҳвҖҳbetween-clusterвҖҷвҖҷ 1-unit increase of that predictor. An example is a comparison of females and males using a dummy variable and its coefficient. However, this fixed effect in the GLMM applies only when the random effect ЕҪas well as other explanatory variables in the model. takes the same value in both groups: for instance, a male and a female with the same value for their random effects.
It is in this sense that random effects models are conditional models, as both within- and between-cluster effects apply conditional on the random effect value. By contrast, effects in marginal models are averaged over all clusters ЕҪi.e., population averaged., so those effects do not refer to a comparison at a fixed value of a random effect. In fact, a fundamental difference between the two model types is that when the link function is nonlinear, such as the logit, the population-averaged effects of marginal models often are smaller than the cluster-specific effects of GLMMs.
Specifically, the GLMM ЕҪ12.1. refers to the conditional mean, вҗ®it s EЕҪYit < u i.. By inverting the link function,
E ЕҪ Yit < u i . s gy1 ЕҪ x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i . .

Marginally, averaging over the random effects, the mean is

EЕҪ Yit . s E

E ЕҪ Yit < u i .

s

H

gy

1

ЕҪ

x

X i

t

вҗӨ

q

z itX u i .

f ЕҪui;

вҢә.

dui,

BINARY RESPONSES: LOGISTIC-NORMAL MODEL

499

where f ЕҪu; вҢә. is the NЕҪ0, вҢә. density function for the random effects. For the identity link,

EЕҪ Yit . s HЕҪx itX вҗӨ q z itX u i . f ЕҪu i ; вҢә . du i s x itX вҗӨ .

The marginal model has the same model form and effects вҗӨ. This is not true for other links. For instance, for the logistic-normal model ЕҪ12.5.,

expЕҪx itX вҗӨ q ui .

EЕҪ Yit . s E

X

.

1 q expЕҪx itвҗӨ q ui .

This expectation does not have form exp ЕҪxXitвҗӨ.rw1 q exp ЕҪxXitвҗӨ.x except when ui has a degenerate distribution ЕҪвҗҙ s 0..
Approximate relationships exist between estimates from the two model
types. In the logistic-normal case with effect вҗӨ and small вҗҙ , Zeger et al. ЕҪ1988. showed that

EЕҪ Yit . f expЕҪ cx itX вҗӨ . r 1 q expЕҪ cx itX вҗӨ . ,

ЕҪ 12 .8.

where c s w1 q 0.6вҗҙ 2 xy1r2 . Since the effect in the marginal model multiplies that of the conditional model by about c, it is typically smaller in absolute value. The discrepancy increases as вҗҙ increases. For вҗӨ near 0, Neuhaus et al. ЕҪ1991. showed that the marginal model effect is approximately вҗӨЕҪ1 y вҗі ., where вҗі s corrЕҪYit , Yis. at вҗӨ s 0. Again, the discrepancy increases as вҗҙ increases, since вҗі increases with вҗҙ .
For Table 12.1 on ratings of the prime minister, the ML estimate for
model ЕҪ12.3. is вҗӨЛҶs y0.556, with вҗҙЛҶ s 5.16 for variability of Г„ui4. Approximation ЕҪ12.8. suggests that вҗӨЛҶs y0.556 with вҗҙЛҶ s 5.16 corresponds to a marginal
estimate of about w1 q 0.6ЕҪ5.16.2 xy1r2 ЕҪy0.556. s y0.135. The actual marginal estimate is the log odds ratio for the sample marginal distributions, equaling
log ЕҪ880r720. rЕҪ944r656. s y0.163.

In fact, the marginal effect is much smaller than the conditional effect, but
this approximation connecting the two estimates works better for smaller вҗҙЛҶ.
At вҗӨ s 0, the fit of the model is that of the symmetry model, for which
вҗ®ЛҶ12 s вҗ®ЛҶ21 s ЕҪ n12 q n21.r2. The correlation for that 2 = 2 table equals 0.699,
from which the conditional estimate of y0.556 suggests a marginal estimate of y0.556ЕҪ1 y 0.699. s y0.167, very close to the actual value of y0.163.
Figure 12.1 illustrates why the marginal effect is smaller than the condi-
tional effect. For a single explanatory variable x, the figure shows subjectspecific curves for PЕҪYit s 1< ui. for several subjects when considerable heterogeneity exists. This corresponds to a relatively large вҗҙ for random effects.

500

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

FIGURE 12.1 Logistic random-intercept model, showing the conditional ЕҪsubject-specific. curves and the marginal ЕҪpopulation-averaged. curve averaging over these.
At any fixed value of x, variability occurs in the conditional means, EЕҪYit < ui. s PЕҪYit s 1 < ui.. The average of these is the marginal mean, EЕҪYit .. These averages for various x values yield the superimposed curve. It has a shallower slope. In fact, it does not exactly follow the logistic formula. Similar remarks apply to other GLMMs. For the probit link with binary data, however, the conditional probit model with normal random effect does imply a marginal model of probit form ЕҪProblem 12.29.. With univariate random intercept, the marginal effect equals the conditional effect multiplied by w1 q вҗҙ 2 xy1r2 ЕҪZeger et al. 1988.. In Section 13.5.1 we explore the conditionalбҺҗmarginal connection for loglinear GLMMs.
12.2.3 Comments about Conditional versus Marginal Models Random effects models describe conditional ЕҪsubject-specific. effects, whereas marginal models describe population-averaged effects. Some statisticians prefer one of these types, but most feel that both are useful, depending on the application.
The conditional modeling approach is preferable if one wants to specify a mechanism that could generate positive association among clustered observations, estimate cluster-specific effects, estimate their variability, or model the joint distribution. Latent variable constructions used to motivate model forms ЕҪe.g., the tolerance motivation for binary models of Section 6.6.1 and the related threshold motivation in Problem 6.28 and utility motivation in Problem 6.29. usually apply more naturally at the cluster level than at the marginal level. Given a conditional model, one can recover information about marginal distributions. That is, a conditional model implies a marginal model,

BINARY RESPONSES: LOGISTIC-NORMAL MODEL

501

but a marginal model does not itself imply a conditional model ЕҪalthough see Note 12.10 for an implicit connection..
In many surveys or epidemiological studies, a goal is to compare the relative frequency of occurrence of some outcome for different groups in a population. Then, quantities of primary interest include between-group odds ratios among marginal probabilities for the different groups. That is, effects of interest are between-cluster rather than within-cluster. When marginal effects are the main focus, it is usually simpler and may be preferable to model the margins directly. One can then parameterize the model so that regression parameters have a direct marginal interpretation. Developing a more detailed model of the joint distribution that generates those margins, as a random effects model does, provides greater opportunity for misspecification. For instance, with longitudinal data the assumption that observations are independent, given the random effect, need not be realistic. With the marginal model approach, we showed in Chapter 11 that ML is sometimes possible but that the GEE approach is computationally simpler and more versatile. A drawback of the GEE approach is that it does not explicitly model random effects and therefore does not allow these effects to be estimated. In addition, likelihood-based inferences are not possible because the joint distribution of the responses is not specified.
In Section 12.2.2 it was noted that conditional effects are usually larger than marginal effects, and increase as variance components increase. Usually, though, the significance of an effect ЕҪe.g., as measured by the ratio of estimate to standard error. is similar in the two model types. If one effect seems more important than another in a conditional model, the same is usually true with a marginal model. So the choice of the model is usually not crucial to inferential conclusions.
This statement requires a caveat, however, since sizes of effects in marginal models depend on the degree of heterogeneity in conditional models. In comparing effects for two groups or two variables that have quite different variance components, relative sizes of effects will differ for marginal and conditional models. From ЕҪ12.8., with binary data the attenuation from the conditional to the marginal effect will tend to be greater for the group having the larger variance component. For instance, suppose that two groups, one young in age and the other elderly, both show the same conditional effect in a crossover study comparing two drugs. If the elderly group has more heterogeneity on the response, their marginal effect may be smaller than that for the younger group. The marginal effects differ even though the conditional effects are the same, because of the greater variance component for the elderly. In such cases, the conditional effect ЕҪappropriately modeled. may have more relevance.
Finally, with either marginal or conditional models, missing data are a common problem with multivariate responses. Unless data are missing at random, potential bias occurs in ML inference. GEE methods usually require

502

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

the stronger condition that data are missing completely at random ЕҪSection 11.4.5.. Thus, modeling missingness or conducting a sensitivity study to discern its potential effects can be an important component of an analysis.
Regardless of the choice of paradigm, it is a challenge for statisticians even to explain to practitioners why marginal and conditional effects differ with a nonlinear link function. Graphics such as Figure 12.1 can help. Neuhaus ЕҪ1992. and Pendergast et al. ЕҪ1996. surveyed ways of analyzing clustered binary data, including conditional and marginal models. Agresti and Natarajan ЕҪ2001. surveyed conditional and marginal modeling of clustered ordinal data.

12.3 EXAMPLES OF RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA
In the next three sections we present a variety of examples of random effects models. In this section we consider binary responses.
12.3.1 Small-Area Estimation of Binomial Proportions
Small-area estimation refers to estimation of parameters for a large number of geographical areas when each has relatively few observations. For instance, one might want county-specific estimates of characteristics such as the unemployment rate or the proportion of families having health insurance coverage. With a national or statewide survey, some counties may have few observations. Then, sample proportions in the counties may poorly estimate the true countywide proportions. Random effects models that treat each county as a cluster can provide improved estimates. In assuming that the true proportions vary according to some distribution, the fitting process вҖҳвҖҳborrows from the wholeвҖҷвҖҷбҺҸit uses data from all the counties to estimate the proportion in any given one.
Let вҗІi denote the true proportion in area i, i s 1, . . . , n. These areas may be all the ones of interest, or only a sample. Let Г„ yi4 denote independent binЕҪTi, вҗІ i. variates; that is, yi s ГқTt is1 yit , where Г„ yit , t s 1, . . . , Ti4 are independent with PЕҪYit s 1. s вҗІi and PЕҪYit s 0. s 1 y вҗІi. The sample proportions Г„ pi s yirTi4 are ML estimates of Г„вҗІi4 for the fixed-effects model
logitЕҪвҗІi . s вҗЈ q вҗӨi , i s 1, . . . , n.
This model is saturated, having n nonredundant parameters ЕҪwith a constraint such as Гқi вҗӨi s 0. for the n binomial observations.
For small Г„Ti4, Г„ pi4 have large standard errors. Thus, Г„ pi4 may display much more variability than Г„вҗІi4, especially when Г„вҗІi4 are similar. Then, it is helpful

EXAMPLES OF RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

503

to shrink Г„ pi4 toward their overall mean. One can accomplish this with the random effects model

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q ui ,

ЕҪ 12 .9.

where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . variates. This model is a logit analog of one-way random effects ANOVA. When вҗҙ s 0, all вҗІi are identical.
For this model,

вҗІЛҶi s expЕҪвҗЈЛҶ q uЛҶi .r 1 q expЕҪвҗЈЛҶ q uЛҶi . .

This estimate differs from the sample proportion pi. If вҗҙЛҶ s 0, then all uЛҶi s 0. Then, the random effects estimate of each вҗІ i is ЕҪГқnis1 ГқTt is1 yit .rЕҪГқiTi.,
the overall sample proportion after pooling all n samples. When truly all вҗІi are equal, this is a much better estimator of that common value than the
sample proportion from a single sample.
Generally, the random effects model estimators shrink the separate sam-
ple proportions toward the overall sample proportion. The amount of shrink-
age decreases as вҗҙЛҶ increases. The shrinkage also decreases as the Г„Ti4 grow;
as each sample has more data, we put more trust in the separate sample
proportions. The predicted random effect uЛҶi is the estimated mean of the
distribution of ui, given the data ЕҪsee Section 12.6.7.. This prediction depends on all the data, not just data from area i. A benefit is potential
reduction in the mean-squared error of the estimates around the true values. We illustrate model ЕҪ12.9. with a simulated sample of size 2000 to mimic a
poll taken before the 1996 U.S. presidential election. For Ti observations in state i ЕҪi s 1, . . . , 51, where i s 51 is DC s District of Columbia., yi is binЕҪTi, вҗІi., where вҗІi is the actual proportion of votes in state i for Bill Clinton in the 1996 election, conditional on voting for Clinton or the
Republican candidate, Bob Dole. Here, Ti is proportional to the stateвҖҷs population size, subject to ГқiTi s 2000. Table 12.2 shows Г„Ti4, Г„вҗІi4, and Г„ pi s yirTi4.
For the ML fit of model ЕҪ12.9., вҗЈЛҶ s 0.163 and вҗҙЛҶ s 0.29. The predicted
random effect values ЕҪobtained using PROC NLMIXED in SAS. yield the
proportion estimates Г„вҗІЛҶi4, also shown in Table 12.2. Since Г„Ti4 are mostly small and since вҗҙЛҶ is relatively small, considerable shrinkage of these esti-
mates occurs from the sample proportions toward the overall proportion
supporting Clinton, which was 0.548. The Г„вҗІЛҶi4 vary only between 0.468 ЕҪfor
TX s Texas. and 0.696 ЕҪfor NY s New York., whereas the sample proportions vary between 0.111 ЕҪfor Idaho. and 1.0 ЕҪfor DC.. Sample proportions
based on fewer observations, such as DC, tended to shrink more. Although
the estimates incorporating random effects are relatively homogeneous, they
tend to be closer than the sample proportions to the true values.

504

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

TABLE 12.2 Estimates of Proportion of Vote for Clinton, Conditional on Voting for Clinton or Dole in 1996 U.S. Presidential Electiona

State Ti

вҗІi

pi

вҗІЛҶ i

State Ti

вҗІi

pi

вҗІЛҶ i

AK

5 0.394 0.200 0.508 MT

7

AL

32 0.463 0.500 0.524 NC

55

AR

19 0.594 0.526 0.537 ND

5

AZ

34 0.512 0.618 0.573 NE

13

CA 240 0.572 0.538 0.538 NH

9

CO

29 0.492 0.586 0.558 NJ

60

CT

25 0.604 0.720 0.602 NM

13

DC

4 0.903 1.000 0.576 NV

12

DE

5 0.586 0.400 0.527 NY 137

FL

108 0.532 0.602 0.583 OH

84

GA

56 0.494 0.554 0.548 OK

23

HI

9 0.643 0.556 0.543 OR

24

IA

22 0.557 0.500 0.528 PA

90

ID

9 0.391 0.111 0.472 RI

7

IL

89 0.596 0.539 0.540 SC

28

IN

44 0.468 0.432 0.488 SD

6

KS

19 0.400 0.316 0.477 TN

40

KY

29 0.506 0.448 0.506 TX 144

LA

33 0.566 0.667 0.592 UT

15

MA

46 0.686 0.739 0.637 VA

51

MD

38 0.586 0.474 0.511 VT

4

ME

9 0.627 0.778 0.578 WA

42

MI

73 0.573 0.589 0.570 WI

39

MN

35 0.594 0.571 0.554 WV

14

MO

41 0.535 0.561 0.550 WY

4

MS

21 0.472 0.333 0.477

a
вҗІi, True; pi, sample; вҗІЛҶi, estimate using random effects model.

0.483 0.475 0.461 0.395 0.567 0.600 0.540 0.506 0.660 0.536 0.456 0.547 0.552 0.689 0.469 0.479 0.513 0.473 0.380 0.489 0.633 0.572 0.559 0.584 0.426

0.429 0.455 0.600 0.462 0.556 0.667 0.462 0.500 0.752 0.488 0.478 0.625 0.567 0.571 0.571 0.667 0.500 0.444 0.333 0.412 0.500 0.619 0.487 0.571 0.250

0.526 0.494 0.546 0.524 0.543 0.611 0.524 0.533 0.696 0.507 0.520 0.569 0.558 0.545 0.552 0.555 0.522 0.468 0.490 0.473 0.538 0.578 0.517 0.548 0.518

12.3.2 Modeling Repeated Binary Responses

In Section 12.1.4 we introduced a random effects version of the Rasch model for repeated binary measurement. This model extends to incorporate covariates.
We illustrate using Table 10.13, first analyzed in Section 10.7.2. The subjects indicated whether they supported legalizing abortion in each of three situations. Table 10.13 also classified the subjects by gender. Let yit denote the response for subject i on item t, with yit s 1 representing support. Consider the model

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s ui q вҗӨt q вҗҘ xi ,

ЕҪ 12 .10.

where xi s 1 for females and 0 for males, and where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. ЕҪEquivalently, one could place a constraint on Г„вҗӨt4 and allow an

EXAMPLES OF RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

505

intercept вҗЈ.. Here, the gender effect вҗҘ is assumed the same for each item, and the Г„вҗӨt4 refer to the items.
Since model ЕҪ12.10. implies nonnegative association among responses on the items, one should use items and scales for which this should occur. For opinions about legalized abortion with scale ЕҪyes, no., it would not be appropriate for one question to ask вҖҳвҖҳDo you agree that abortion should be legal when a woman is not married?вҖҷвҖҷ and another to ask вҖҳвҖҳDo you agree that abortion should be illegal during the last three months of pregnancy?вҖҷвҖҷ
Table 12.3 summarizes ML fitting results. The contrasts of Г„вҗӨЛҶt4 indicate
greater support for legalized abortion with item 1 ЕҪwhen the family has a low income and cannot afford any more children. than with the other two. There is slight evidence of greater support with item 2 ЕҪwhen the woman is not married and does not want to marry the man. than with item 3 ЕҪwhen the woman wants the abortion for any reason.. The fixed effects estimates have log odds ratio interpretations. For a given subject of either gender, for instance, the estimated odds of supporting legalized abortion for item 1 equal
expЕҪ0.83. s 2.3 times the estimated odds for item 3. Since вҗҘЛҶ s 0.01, for each
item the estimated probability of supporting legalized abortion is similar for females and males with similar random effect values.
For these data, subjects are highly heterogeneous ЕҪвҗҙЛҶ s 8.6.. Thus, strong
associations exist among responses on the three items. This is reflected by 1595 of the 1850 subjects making the same response on all three items: that is, response patterns ЕҪ0, 0, 0. and ЕҪ1, 1, 1.. It implies tremendous variability in between-subject odds ratios. From ЕҪ12.7., for different subjects of a given gender, the middle 50% of odds ratios comparing items 1 and 3 are estimated to vary between about expЕҪ0.83 y 0.95 = 8.6. and expЕҪ0.83 q 0.95 = 8.6..
For contingency tables, one can obtain cell fitted values. To do this, one must integrate over the estimated random effects distribution to obtain estimated marginal probabilities of any particular sequence of responses. For the ML parameter estimates, the probability of a particular sequence of responses ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yiT . for a given ui is the appropriate product of conditional probabilities, ЕҒ t PЕҪYit s yit < ui., since the responses are independent given ui. Integrating this product probability with respect to ui for the

TABLE 12.3 Summary of ML Estimates for Random Effects Model (12.10) and ML and GEE Estimates for Corresponding Marginal Model

GLMM ML

Marginal Model ML Marginal Model GEE

Effect

Parameter Estimate SE Estimate

SE

Estimate

SE

Abortion Gender
'varЕҪ ui .

вҗӨ1 y вҗӨ3 вҗӨ1 y вҗӨ2 вҗӨ2 y вҗӨ3
вҗҘ
вҗҙ

0.83

0.16

0.148

0.030

0.149

0.030

0.54

0.16

0.098

0.027

0.097

0.028

0.29

0.16

0.049

0.027

0.052

0.027

0.01

0.48

0.005

0.088

0.003

0.088

8.6

0.54

506

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

NЕҪ0, вҗҙЛҶ 2 . distribution estimates the marginal probability for a given cell
ЕҪaveraged over subjects.. This requires numerical integration methods described in Section 12.6. Multiplying this marginal probability of a given sequence by the sample size for that multinomial gives a fitted value.
Not surprisingly, for these data, the response patterns ЕҪ0, 0, 0. and ЕҪ1, 1, 1. also have the largest fitted values for the multinomial for each gender. For instance, for females 440 indicated support under all three circumstances ЕҪ457 under none of the three., and the fitted value was 436.5 ЕҪ459.3.. Overall chi-squared statistics comparing the 16 observed and fitted counts are G2 s 23.2 and X 2 s 27.8 ЕҪdf s 9.. These are not that large considering the very large sample size and the few parameters ЕҪ вҗӨ1, вҗӨ2 , вҗӨ3, вҗҘ , вҗҙ . used to describe the 14 multinomial cell probabilities ЕҪ8 y 1 s 7 for each gender. in Table 10.13. Here, df s 9 since we are modeling 14 multinomial parameters using five GLMM parameters.
An extended model allows interaction between gender and item. It has different Г„вҗӨt4 for men and women. However, it does not fit better. The likelihood-ratio statistic s 1.0 ЕҪdf s 2. for testing that the extra parameters equal 0.
An alternative analysis of these data focuses on the marginal distributions, treating the dependence as a nuisance. A marginal model analog of ЕҪ12.10. is
logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗӨt q вҗҘ x.
For it, Table 12.3 also shows GEE estimates for the exchangeable working correlation structure and ML estimates. The marginal model fits well, with G2 s 1.1; here, df s 2 since the model describes six marginal probabilities ЕҪthree for each gender. using four parameters. These population-averaged
Г„вҗӨЛҶt4 are much smaller than the subject-specific Г„вҗӨЛҶt4 from the GLMM. This reflects the very large GLMM heterogeneity ЕҪвҗҙЛҶ s 8.6. and the corresponding
strong correlations among the three responses. For instance, the GEE analysis estimates a common correlation of 0.82 between pairs of responses.
Although the GLMM Г„вҗӨЛҶt4 are about five to six times the marginal model Г„вҗӨЛҶt4,
so are the standard errors. The two approaches provide similar substantive interpretations and conclusions.

12.3.3 Longitudinal Mental Depression Study Revisited
We now revisit Table 11.2 from a longitudinal study to compare a new drug with a standard for treating subjects suffering mental depression. In Section 11.2.1 we analyzed the data using marginal models. The response yt for measurement t on mental depression equals 1 for normal and 0 for abnormal. For severity of initial diagnosis s ЕҪ1 s severe, 0 s mild., drug treatment d ЕҪ1 s new, 0 s standard., and time of measurement t, we used the model
logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 s q вҗӨ2 d q вҗӨ3 t q вҗӨ4 dt
to evaluate the marginal distributions.

EXAMPLES OF RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

507

TABLE 12.4 Model Parameter Estimates for Marginal and Conditional Logit Models Fitted to Table 11.2

Parameter

ML Marginal Std. GEE Marginal Std. Random Effects Std. Estimate Error Estimate Error ML Estimate Error

Diagnosis

y1.29

0.14

y1.31

0.15

y1.32

0.15

Drug

y0.06

0.22

y0.06

0.23

y0.06

0.22

Time

0.48

0.12

0.48

0.12

0.48

0.12

Drug = Time

1.01

0.18

1.02

0.19

1.02

0.19

Now let yit denote observation t for subject i. The model
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ1 s q вҗӨ2 d q вҗӨ3 t q вҗӨ4 dt q ui
has subject-specific rather than population-averaged effects. Table 12.4 shows
the ML estimates. The time trend estimates are вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.48 for the standard drug and вҗӨЛҶ3 q вҗӨЛҶ4 s 1.50 for the new one. These are nearly identical to the
ML and GEE estimates for the corresponding marginal model, also shown in the table ЕҪthese are discussed in Sections 11.2.1 and 11.3.2.. The reason is that the repeated observations do not exhibit much correlation, as the GEE
analysis observed. Here, this is reflected by вҗҙЛҶ s 0.07, showing little hetero-
geneity among subjects. Based on the model fit, integrating over the NЕҪ0, 0.072 . random effects
distribution yields marginal fitted values of the possible response sequences. Comparing these to the sample counts in Table 11.2 indicates a relatively good fit. The model describes the 28 multinomial cell probabilities ЕҪseven for the trivariate response at each of the four severityбҺҗdrug combinations. using six parameters. The usual fit statistics comparing the observed cell counts to their fitted values are G2 s 22.0 and X 2 s 20.8 ЕҪdf s 28 y 6 s 22..
The deviance increases by only 0.001 when one assumes that вҗҙ s 0. From results to be discussed in Section 12.6.6, the P-value for comparing models is half what one gets by treating the deviance as chi-squared with df s 1, or P s 0.49. This simpler model, which gives nearly identical effect estimates and SE values, is adequate. This is also suggested by AIC values ЕҪe.g., PROC NLMIXED in SAS reports 1173.9 for the random effects model and 1171.9 for the simpler model with вҗҙ s 0..
12.3.4 Modeling Heterogeneity among Multicenter Clinical Trials
Many applications compare two groups on a response for data stratified on a third variable. With binary outcomes, the data form several 2 = 2 contingency tables. The main focus relates to studying the association in the 2 = 2 tables and whether and how it varies among the strata.

508

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

The strata are sometimes themselves a sample, such as schools or medical clinics. A random effects approach is then natural. With a random sampling of strata, it enables inferences to extend to the population of strata. The fit of the random effects model provides a simple summary such as an estimated mean and standard deviation of log odds ratios for the population of strata. In each stratum it also provides a predicted log odds ratio that shrinks the sample value toward the mean. This is especially useful when the sample size in a stratum is small and the ordinary sample odds ratio has large standard error. Even when the strata are not a random sample or not even a sample and a random effects approach is not as natural, the model is beneficial for these purposes.
We illustrate using Table 12.5, previously analyzed in Section 6.3, showing the results of a clinical trial at eight centers. The purpose was to compare an active drug and a control, for curing an infection. For a subject in center i using treatment t ЕҪ1 s active drug; 2 s control., let yit s 1 denote success. One possible model is the logistic-normal,

logit P ЕҪ Yi1 s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q вҗӨr2 q ui logit P ЕҪ Yi2 s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ y вҗӨr2 q ui ,

ЕҪ 12 .11.

TABLE 12.5 Clinical Trial Relating Treatment to Response for Eight Centers

Center Treatment

Response

Success

Failure

Sample Odds Ratio

Fitted Odds Ratio

1

Drug

11

25

1.19

2.02

Control

10

27

2

Drug

16

4

1.82

2.09

Control

22

10

3

Drug

14

5

4.80

2.19

Control

7

12

4

Drug

2

14

2.29

2.11

Control

1

16

5

Drug

6

11

Пұ

2.18

Control

0

12

6

Drug

1

10

Пұ

2.12

Control

0

10

7

Drug

1

4

2.0

2.11

Control

1

8

8

Drug

4

2

0.33

2.06

Control

6

1

Source: Beitler and Landis ЕҪ1985..

EXAMPLES OF RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

509

where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . variates. This model assumes that the log odds ratio вҗӨ between treatment and response is constant over centers. The parameter вҗҙ summarizes center heterogeneity in the success probabilities.
A logistic-normal model permitting treatment-by-center interaction is

logit P ЕҪ Yi1 s 1 < ui , bi . s вҗЈ q ЕҪ вҗӨ q bi . r2 q ui , logit P ЕҪ Yi2 s 1 < ui , bi . s вҗЈ y ЕҪ вҗӨ q bi . r2 q ui ,

ЕҪ 12 .12.

where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙa2 ., Г„ bi4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙb2 ., and Г„ui4 are independent of Г„bi4. The log odds ratio equals вҗӨ q bi in center i. These vary among centers according to a NЕҪ вҗӨ, вҗҙb2 . distribution. That is, вҗӨ is the expected center-specific log odds ratio between treatment and response, and вҗҙb describes variability in those log odds ratios. The model parameters are ЕҪ вҗЈ , вҗӨ, вҗҙa, вҗҙb..
In Table 12.5 the sample success rates vary markedly among centers both for the control and drug treatments, but in all except the last center that rate is higher for the drug treatment. In using models with random center and possibly random treatment effects, it is preferable to have more than eight centers. It is difficult to get reliable variance component estimates with so few centers. Keeping this in mind, we use these data to illustrate the models. With a large number of centers it would also be sensible to allow correlation between bi and ui, but we shall not attempt that here. The treatment
estimates are вҗӨЛҶs 0.739 ЕҪSE s 0.300. for the model ЕҪ12.11. of no interaction and вҗӨЛҶs 0.746 ЕҪSE s 0.325. for the model ЕҪ12.12. permitting interaction.
Considerable evidence of a drug effect occurs. With such a small sample, however, it is unclear whether that effect is weak or moderate.
The evidence about association is weaker for the model permitting interaction. The Wald statistics are ЕҪ0.739r0.300.2 s 6.0 for the no-interaction model and ЕҪ0.746r0.325.2 s 5.3 for the interaction model. The corresponding likelihood-ratio statistics are 6.3 and 4.6 ЕҪdf s 1.. The extra variance component in the interaction model pertains to variability in the log odds
ratios. As its estimate вҗҙЛҶb increases, so does the standard error of the estimated treatment effect вҗӨЛҶ tend to increase. In this example, вҗҙЛҶb s 0.15 is relatively small and the standard errors of вҗӨЛҶ are not very different in the two models. When вҗҙЛҶb s 0, the standard errors and the model fits are the same.
To show the effect of larger вҗҙЛҶb on the standard error of the mean treatment effect estimate вҗӨЛҶ, we alter Table 12.5 slightly. We change three
failures to successes for drug in center 3 and three successes to failures for drug in center 8. With these changes, the estimated variability of the
treatment effects increases from вҗҙЛҶb s 0.15 to вҗҙЛҶb s 1.4. The ML estimates of the mean treatment effects are then вҗӨЛҶs 0.722 ЕҪSE s 0.299. for the no interaction model ЕҪ12.11. and вҗӨЛҶs 0.767 ЕҪSE s 0.623. for the interaction
model. The Wald statistics are 5.8 and 1.5. The evidence of a treatment

510

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

effect is then dramatically weaker for the interaction model ЕҪ12.12.. Not surprisingly, when the treatment effect varies substantially among centers, it is more difficult to estimate the mean of that effect.
For the actual data in Table 12.5, because вҗҙЛҶb s 0.15 for model ЕҪ12.12. is
relatively small, the model shrinks the sample odds ratios considerably. Table 12.5 shows the sample values and the model predicted values. These are based on predicting the random effects ЕҪto be explained in Section 12.6., and substituting them and the ML estimates of fixed effects into the model formula to estimate the two response probabilities for each treatment in each center. The sample odds ratios vary from 0.33 to Пұ; their random effects model counterparts ЕҪcomputed with PROC NLMIXED in SAS. vary only between 2.0 and 2.2. The smoothed estimates are much less variable and do not have the same ordering as the sample values. For instance, the smoothed estimate of 2.2 for center 3 is greater than the estimate of 2.1 for center 6, even though the sample value is infinite for the latter. This partly reflects the
greater shrinkage that occurs when sample sizes are smaller. When вҗҙЛҶb s 0,
model ЕҪ12.12. provides the same fit as model ЕҪ12.11., and estimated odds ratios are identical in each center.
For related analyses permitting heterogeneity in odds ratios with several 2 = 2 tables, see Liu and Pierce ЕҪ1993. and Skene and Wakefield ЕҪ1990..

12.3.5 Alternative Formulations of Random Effects Models

There are other ways to express the models. For instance, an equivalent expression for interaction model ЕҪ12.12. is

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1< ui , bit . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xt q bit q ui ,

where xt is a treatment dummy variable ЕҪ x1 s 1, x2 s 0., Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0,вҗҙa2 ., and Г„ bi14 and Г„ bi24 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. Here, bi1 y bi2 corresponds to bi in parameterization ЕҪ12.12., and 2 вҗҙ 2 corresponds to вҗҙb2.
Formulating a random effects model requires care about implications of
the model expression and the random effects correlation structure. Suppose that one expressed the interaction model ЕҪ12.12. as

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui , bi . s вҗЈ q ЕҪ вҗӨ q bi . xt q ui ,

ЕҪ 12 .13.

with Г„bi4 from NЕҪ0, вҗҙb2 .. This is inappropriate, since the model then imposes greater variability for the logit with the first treatment than the second, since x2 s 0 and Г„ui4 and Г„bi4 are uncorrelated. Also, the model should not depend on the definition of the dummy variable xt. Note, however, that if zt s xt q c for some constant c, then model ЕҪ12.13. is equivalently

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui , bi .
s вҗЈ q ЕҪ вҗӨ q bi . ЕҪ zt y c. q ui s вҗЈX q ЕҪ вҗӨ q bi . zt q В®i ,

EXAMPLES OF RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

511

where вҗЈ РҲ s вҗЈ y cвҗӨ and В®i s ui y cbi. Thus, ЕҪ В®i, bi. are correlated even if ЕҪui, bi. are not. In fact, expression ЕҪ12.13. is sensible only with correlated random effects. It is then equivalent to ЕҪ12.12. with correlated random effects. See Agresti and Hartzel ЕҪ2000. for further discussion.

12.3.6 CaptureвҖ“Recapture Modeling to Predict Population Size
CaptureбҺҗrecapture experiments are a method of using a series of samples to estimate the size of a population. Such methods have traditionally been used to estimate animal abundance in some habitat. At each sampling occasion, animals are captured and marked in some manner. The animals captured for any given sample are freed and all animals are candidates for recapture in a later sample. With T sampling occasions, a 2T contingency table displays the data, with scale ЕҪcaptured, not captured. at each occasion. The count n22 РёРёРё 2 is missing for the cell corresponding to noncapture at each occasion. If we knew this cell count, adding it to the others would yield the population size. Models specified for this 2T table use the 2T y 1 observed counts to fit the model. The fit refers to those 2T y 1 cells, but extrapolating it yields an estimated count in the unobserved cell. Adding that to the total of the 2T y 1 observed counts yields an estimate of population size.
To illustrate, suppose that T s 2. We observe n11 animals at both occasions, n12 at the first but not the second occasion, and n21 at the second but not the first. We do not know the number n22 not captured either time. If we
assumed independence in the 2 = 2 table, the prediction ЛҶn22 would be the value giving an odds ratio of 1.0; but ЕҪ n11 ЛҶn22 .rЕҪ n12 n21. s 1 implies that ЛҶn22 s n12 n21rn11. This yields a population size prediction ЕҪSekar and Deming
1949. of

NЛҶ s n11 q n12 q n21 q n12 n21rn11

s n1qnq1rn11

with

var $ЕҪ NЛҶ. s 3 n1qnq1 n12 n21 .
n11

The assumption of independence is usually unrealistic, however. With additional sampling occasions, one can try more complex models.
Table 12.6, analyzed by Cormack ЕҪ1989. and others, refers to a study having T s 6 consecutive trapping days for a population of snowshoe hares. The study observed 68 hares. For instance, Table 12.6 indicates that 3 hares were observed on the first day but on none of the other days. For simplicity, models for studies over a brief time period assume that no deaths, births, or immigration into the population occurred during the study period. This is called a closed population.
Most methods for captureбҺҗrecapture treat the probability of capture at a given occasion as identical for each subject ЕҪe.g., animal.. This is usually

512

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

TABLE 12.6 Results of CaptureвҖ“Recapture of Snowshoe Hares

Capture Capture Capture

Capture 3, Capture 2, Capture 1a

6

5

4

000 001 010 011 100 101 110 111

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

1

0

бҺҸ3 6 0 5 1 0 0

ЕҪ24.0. ЕҪ2.3. ЕҪ5.4. ЕҪ0.9. ЕҪ3.2. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ1.2. ЕҪ0.3.

1

32300100

ЕҪ4.8. ЕҪ0.8. ЕҪ1.8. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ1.1. ЕҪ0.3. ЕҪ0.6. ЕҪ0.3.

0

42310100

ЕҪ3.9. ЕҪ0.6. ЕҪ1.5. ЕҪ0.4. ЕҪ0.9. ЕҪ0.2. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ0.2.

1

10000000

ЕҪ1.3. ЕҪ0.3. ЕҪ0.8. ЕҪ0.3. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ0.2. ЕҪ0.4. ЕҪ0.3.

0

41112020

ЕҪ6.8. ЕҪ1.1. ЕҪ2.6. ЕҪ0.6. ЕҪ1.5. ЕҪ0.4. ЕҪ0.9. ЕҪ0.4.

1

40301020

ЕҪ2.3. ЕҪ0.6. ЕҪ1.3. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ0.8. ЕҪ0.3. ЕҪ0.7. ЕҪ0.4.

0

20101010

ЕҪ1.9. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ1.1. ЕҪ0.4. ЕҪ0.7. ЕҪ0.3. ЕҪ0.6. ЕҪ0.4.

1

11100012

ЕҪ1.0. ЕҪ0.4. ЕҪ0.9. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ0.5. ЕҪ0.3. ЕҪ0.7. ЕҪ0.7.

aValues in parentheses represent the fit of the logistic-normal model. Source: A. Agresti, Biometrics 50: 494бҺҗ500 ЕҪ1994..

unrealistic. One way to allow heterogeneous capture probabilities uses a logit model having subject random effects. For subject i, i s 1, . . . , N with N unknown, let yiX s ЕҪ yi1, . . . , yiT ., where yit s 1 denotes capture in sample t and yit s 0 denotes noncapture. Lacking explanatory variables, one might use the Rasch-type model
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s ui q вҗӨt ,
where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. The larger the value of вҗӨt, the greater the capture probability at occasion t. The larger is вҗҙ , the more heterogeneous are the capture probabilities. When вҗҙ s 0 this logistic-normal model simplifies to mutual independence wi.e., loglinear model ЕҪ8.6.x for the 2T table.
As with other random effects models, integrating the random effect from the probability mass function of ЕҪyi < ui. yields the likelihood function ЕҪas discussed in Section 12.6.. One can consider this likelihood function and the resulting ML estimates of Г„вҗӨt4 and вҗҙ for all possible counts in the unobserved cell. A profile likelihood function views the maximized likelihood as a function of the unobserved cell count. The ML prediction for that unobserved cell count is the value that maximizes this profile likelihood. Lacking specialized software, one can fit the random effects model repeatedly with various counts in the unobserved cell to determine by trial and error the count that maximizes the likelihood function.

RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL DATA

513

ML fitting of this model to Table 12.6 yields a prediction of 24 for the unobserved cell count. Since the study observed 68 hares, the population size
estimate is NЛҶ s 92. For this fit, вҗҙЛҶ s 1.0.
Methods for obtaining a confidence interval for N include using the profile likelihood function or a nonparametric bootstrap method. With the profile likelihood approach, the interval for the missing cell count consists of the possible counts for that cell such that the G2 fit statistic increases by less than вҗ№12ЕҪвҗЈ. from its value at the ML estimate. Adding the number of subjects observed in the samples to the endpoints of this interval gives the corresponding interval for N. For the snowshoe hares, a 95% profile-likelihood
confidence interval for N is ЕҪ75, 154.. It is common for NЛҶ to be nearer the
low end of the interval. See Coull and Agresti ЕҪ1999. for details.
The greater the heterogeneity, as reflected by larger вҗҙЛҶ, NЛҶ tends to be larger and the confidence interval tends to be wider. Large вҗҙЛҶ causes
difficulties in estimation, since it results in a relatively flat likelihood surface. This implies imprecise estimates of N. In particular, the upper limit of the profile-likelihood confidence interval for N is essentially infinite when the likelihood function gets sufficiently flat. Also, the ML estimator is then often
unstable, with small changes in the data yielding large changes in NЛҶ.
Difficulties can also arise when probabilities of capture are small. Evidence of this occurs when most subjects captured appear in only one sample. When
this happens or when вҗҙЛҶ is large, it is unrealistic to expect narrow confidence
intervals for N. Alternative models are discussed in Section 13.1.3. Models that ignore
likely heterogeneity can give unrealistically narrow confidence intervals for N. Although traditionally used for animal populations, captureбҺҗrecapture applications also include estimating population size for human populations, such as estimating population prevalence of injecting drug use and HIV infection. Darroch et al. ЕҪ1993. considered census population estimation, and Chao et al. ЕҪ2001. estimated the number of people infected during a hepatitis outbreak ЕҪProblem 12.21.. An interesting application is estimating the number of files on the World Wide Web relating to some subject by taking samples using several search engines ЕҪFienberg et al. 1999..

12.4 RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL DATA
Random effects models for binary responses extend to multicategory responses. For the multicategory models of Chapter 7, a multinomial observation with I categories is a vector of I y 1 indicators, the jth of which is 1 when the observation falls in category j and 0 otherwise. In Section 7.1.5 we defined a multivariate GLM by applying a vector of link functions to this multivariate response. Adding random effects extends this multivariate GLM and the GLMM ЕҪ12.1. to a multivariate GLMM ЕҪHartzel et al. 2001b; Tutz and Hennevogl 1996.. This class includes models for nominal and ordinal responses.

514

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

12.4.1 Cumulative Logit Model with Random Intercept
Modeling is simpler with ordinal than nominal responses, since often the same random effect and the same fixed effect can apply to each logit. With cumulative logits, this is the proportional odds structure ЕҪSection 7.2.2.. Denote the possible outcomes for yit, observation t in cluster i, by 1, 2, . . . , I. A GLMM for the cumulative logits has the form
logit P ЕҪ Yit F j < u i . s вҗЈj q x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i , j s 1, . . . , I y 1. ЕҪ12.14.
Hedeker and Gibbons ЕҪ1994. discussed model fitting, primarily with u i as multivariate normal.
For cumulative logit and probit random intercept models, the same relationship exists between their effects and those in marginal models as presented in Section 12.2.2 for binary-response models. Marginal effects tend to be smaller, increasingly so as вҗҙ increases. Also, the same predictor structure as in ЕҪ12.14. holds with other links for which a common effect for each logit is plausible. For instance, Hartzel et al. ЕҪ2001a, b. used it with adjacent-categories logits.

12.4.2 Insomnia Study Revisited
Table 11.4 showed results of a clinical trial at two occasions comparing a drug with placebo in treating insomnia patients. In Sections 11.2.3 and 11.3.3 the data were analyzed with marginal models. For yt s time to fall asleep at occasion t, the marginal model
logit P ЕҪ Yt F j . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ1t q вҗӨ2 x q вҗӨ3 tx
permitted interaction between t s occasion ЕҪ0 s initial, 1 s follow-up. and x s treatment ЕҪ1 s active, 0 s placebo.. Table 12.7 shows the ML and GEE estimates.
Now, let yit denote the response for subject i at occasion t. Table 12.7 also shows results of fitting the random-intercept model
logit P ЕҪ Yit F j < ui . s ui q вҗЈj q вҗӨ1t q вҗӨ2 x q вҗӨ3 tx.

TABLE 12.7 Fits of Cumulative Logit Models to Table 11.4 a

Effect

Marginal ML

Treatment Occasion Treatment = occasion

0.046 ЕҪ0.236. 1.074 ЕҪ0.162. 0.662 ЕҪ0.244.

aValues in parentheses represent standard errors.

Marginal GEE
0.034 ЕҪ0.238. 1.038 ЕҪ0.168. 0.708 ЕҪ0.244.

Random Effects ЕҪGLMM. ML 0.058 ЕҪ0.366. 1.602 ЕҪ0.283. 1.081 ЕҪ0.380.

RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR MULTINOMIAL DATA

515

Results are substantively similar to the marginal model, but estimates and
standard errors are about 50% larger. This reflects the relatively large
heterogeneity ЕҪвҗҙЛҶ s 1.90. and the resultant strong association between the
responses at the two occasions.

12.4.3 Cluster Sampling

With surveys that use cluster sampling, standard methods based on simple random sampling ЕҪe.g., for a single multinomial sample. require adjustment. Ordinary standard errors are too small. The usual chi-squared test statistics no longer have chi-squared null distributions, but rather, weighted sums of chi-squared. Rao and Thomas ЕҪ1988. surveyed ways of adjusting standard inferences to take into account complex sampling methods in the analysis and modeling of categorical data.
When the sampling scheme randomly samples clusters, one can account for the clustering using cluster random effects. We illustrate using data from Brier ЕҪ1980., who reported 96 observations taken from 20 neighborhoods ЕҪthe clusters. on Y s satisfaction with home and X s satisfaction with neighborhood as a whole. Each variable was measured with the ordinal scale ЕҪunsatisfied, satisfied, very satisfied.. BrierвҖҷs analysis adjusted for clustering by reducing the Pearson statistic for testing independence in the 3 = 3 contingency table relating X and Y from 17.9 to 15.7 ЕҪdf s 4..
Consider the model for yit, observation t in cluster i,

logit P ЕҪ Yit F j < ui . s ui q вҗЈj q xit вҗӨ ,

ЕҪ 12 .15.

with scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3. for the satisfaction levels of xit. With a NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . distribu-
tion assumed for ui, the ML effect estimate is вҗӨЛҶs y1.201 ЕҪSE s 0.407., with вҗҙЛҶ s 0.92. By contrast, treating the 96 observations as a random sample corresponds to fitting this model with вҗҙ s 0. It has вҗӨЛҶs y1.226 ЕҪSE s 0.370..
A slight reduction in significance results from adjusting for clustering.

12.4.4 Baseline-Category Logit Models with Random Effects

For nominal response variables, one can formulate a binary model that pairs each category with a baseline and fit these models simultaneously while allowing separate effects. This requires using a vector of cluster-specific random effects u i j, one for each logit. The general form of the baseline-category logit model with random effects is

P ЕҪ Yit s j .

X

X

log

s вҗЈj q xitвҗӨj q zituij,

P ЕҪ Yit s I .

j s 1, . . . , I y 1.

The fixed effects вҗӨ j and the random effects u i j depend on j, since the baseline category is arbitrary. With nominal responses there is no reason to
expect effects to be similar for different j.

516

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

Cluster

i

has

a

vector

X
ui

s

ЕҪuXi1,

.

.

.

,

X
u i,

Iy1

.

of

random

effects.

The

usual

approach treats Г„u i4 as independent multivariate normal variates. We recom-

mend an unspecified covariance matrix вҢә for u i. For instance, it is sensible

to allow different variances for random effects that apply to different logits.

With a common variance, that variance would not be the same as that for

the implied random effect for a logit for an arbitrary pair of categories, logw PЕҪYit s j.rPЕҪYit s k.x. With unspecified covariance the model is struc-

turally the same regardless of the choice of baseline category. See Hartzel et al. ЕҪ2001b. for an example.

12.5 MULTIVARIATE RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA
In practice, random effects are often univariate, taking the form of random intercepts. However, weвҖҷve seen that nominal responses require multivariate random effects and that bivariate random effects are helpful for describing heterogeneity in multicenter clinical trials. In this section we present other examples in which multivariate random effects are natural.
12.5.1 Matched Pairs with a Bivariate Binary Response Leo Goodman analyzed Table 12.8 in several articles ЕҪe.g., Goodman 1974.. A sample of schoolboys were interviewed twice, several months apart, and asked about their self-perceived membership in the вҖҳвҖҳleading crowdвҖҷвҖҷ and about whether they sometimes needed to go against their principles to belong to that group. Thus, there are two binary response variables, which we refer to as membership and attitude, measured at two interview times for each subject. Table 12.8 labels the categories for attitude as ЕҪpositive, negative., where вҖҳвҖҳpositiveвҖҷвҖҷ refers to disagreeing with the statement that one must go against his principles.

TABLE 12.8 Membership and Attitude Toward the вҖҳвҖҳLeading CrowdвҖҷвҖҷ

ЕҪ M, A. for First Interview

ЕҪYes, Positive.

ЕҪ M, A. for Second Interview a ЕҪYes, Negative. ЕҪNo, Positive.

ЕҪNo, Negative.

Yes, positive

458

140

110

49

Yes, negative

171

182

56

87

No, positive

184

75

531

281

No, negative

85

97

338

554

aM, membership; A, attitude. Source: J. S. Coleman, Introduction to Mathematical Sociology ЕҪLondon: Free Press of Glencoe, 1964., p. 170.

MULTIVARIATE RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

517

For subject i, let yit В® be the response at interview time t on variable В®, where В® s M for membership and В® s A for attitude. The logit model

logit P ЕҪ Yit В® s 1 < uiВ® . s вҗӨt В® q uiВ®

ЕҪ 12 .16.

is a multivariate form of the Rasch-type model ЕҪ12.4.. It has additive item and subject effects for each variable В®. Here, ЕҪui M , ui A. is a bivariate random effect that describes subject heterogeneity for ЕҪmembership, attitude.. We assume that the Г„ЕҪui M , ui A.4 are independent from a bivariate normal distribution, NЕҪ 0, вҢә., with possibly different variances and nonzero correlation.
The ML fit yields вҗӨЛҶ2 M y вҗӨЛҶ1 M s 0.379 ЕҪSE s 0.075. and вҗӨЛҶ2 A y вҗӨЛҶ1 A s
0.176 ЕҪSE s 0.058.. For both variables, the probability of the first outcome

category is higher at the second interview. For instance, for a given subject

the odds of self-perceived membership in the leading crowd at interview 2 are estimated to be expЕҪ0.379. s 1.46 times the odds at interview 1.

The estimated correlation between the random effects is 0.30. Their
estimated standard deviations are вҗҙЛҶ1 s 3.1 for Г„ui M 4 and вҗҙЛҶ2 s 1.5 for Г„ui A4.
Since these are quite different, the relative sizes of membership and attitude effects differ for marginal and conditional models ЕҪrecall the caveat in Section 12.2.3.. The marginal effect is attenuated more for membership. For

this conditional model, the ratio of estimated odds ratios is expЕҪ0.379.rexpЕҪ0.176. s 1.46r1.19 s 1.22. For the marginal model, the esti-

mated odds ratios use the marginal distributions of each variable at each time we.g., this is ЕҪ1392r2006.rЕҪ1253r2145. s 1.188 for membershipx, and the

ratio of estimated odds ratios is 1.188r1.133 s 1.05.

Integrating over the estimated random effects distribution yields fitted

values for the 16 possible sequences of responses in Table 12.8. The deviance of G2 s 5.5 ЕҪdf s 8. compares the 16 observed counts to their fitted values.

The model, which describes 15 multinomial probabilities with seven parame-

ters, fits well. The model constraining the random effects to be uncorrelated fits poorly ЕҪG2 s 97.5, df s 9.. The model constraining the random effects to

be perfectly correlated is equivalent to having a single random effect ui for each subject. The model is then a Rasch-type model with four items that are

the combinations of interviews and variables. That model fits very poorly ЕҪG2 s 655.5, df s 10.. Agresti et al. ЕҪ2000. gave further details.

12.5.2 Continuation-Ratio Logits for Clustered Ordinal Outcomes: Toxicity Study
For continuation-ratio logit models with ordinal responses, the logits refer to independent binomial variates ЕҪSection 7.4.3.. Thus, binary logit random effects models apply to clustered ordinal responses using continuation-ratio logits ЕҪTen Have and Uttal 1994.. For observation t in cluster i, let вҗ»i j s PЕҪYit s j < Yit G j, ui j.. ЕҪMore generally, this probability could also depend on t, but this generality is not needed for the example below.. The continuation-ratio logits are Г„logitЕҪвҗ»i j., j s 1, . . . , I y 14.

518

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

Let ni j be the number of subjects in cluster i making response j. Let ni s Гқjs1 I ni j. For a given cluster in a continuation-ratio logit model, treating ЕҪ ni1, . . . , ni, Iy1 . as multinomial is equivalent to treating them as a sequential set of independent binomial variates, where ni j is bin ЕҪ ni y Гқh- j nih, вҗ»i j., j s 1, . . . , I y 1.

We illustrate with a developmental toxicity study conducted under the

U.S. National Toxicology Program. This study examined the developmental effects of ethylene glycol ЕҪEG. by administering one of four dosages ЕҪ0, 0.75, 1.50, 3.00 grkg. to pregnant rodents. The four dose groups had ЕҪ25, 24, 22, 23. pregnant rodents. The clusters are litters of mice. The three possible outcomes ЕҪdeadrresorption, malformation, normal. for each fetus

are ordered, normal being the most desirable result. Table 12.9 shows the

data. The continuation-ratio logit is natural here since categories are hierar-

chically related; an animal must survive before a malformation can take place. The following analyses are from Coull and Agresti ЕҪ2000..
For litter i in dose group d, let logitЕҪвҗ»iЕҪd.1. be the continuation-ratio logit for the probability of death and logitЕҪвҗ»iЕҪd.2 . the continuation-ratio logit for the conditional probability of malformation, given survival. wThe notation iЕҪ d.

represents litter i nested within dose d.x Let xd be the dosage for group d. We account for the litter effect using litter-specific random effects u iЕҪd. s ЕҪuiЕҪd.1, uiЕҪd.2 . sampled from NЕҪ0, вҢә d.. This bivariate random effect allows for differing amounts of overdispersion for the probability of death and for the

probability of malformation, given survival. A model also permitting different

fixed effects for each is

logitЕҪвҗ»iЕҪd. j . s uiЕҪd. j q вҗЈ j q вҗӨj x d .

ЕҪ 12 .17.

TABLE 12.9 Response Counts for 94 Litters of Mice on (Number Dead, Number Malformed, Number Normal)

Dose s 0.00 grkg ЕҪ1, 0, 7., ЕҪ0, 0, 14. ЕҪ0, 0, 13., ЕҪ0, 0, 10. ЕҪ0, 1, 15., ЕҪ1, 0, 14. ЕҪ1, 0, 10., ЕҪ0, 0, 12. ЕҪ0, 0, 11., ЕҪ0, 0, 8. ЕҪ1, 0, 6., ЕҪ0, 0, 15. ЕҪ0, 0, 12., ЕҪ0, 0, 12. ЕҪ0, 0, 13., ЕҪ0, 0, 10. ЕҪ0, 0, 10., ЕҪ1, 0, 11. ЕҪ0, 0, 12., ЕҪ0, 0, 13. ЕҪ1, 0, 14., ЕҪ0, 0, 13. ЕҪ0, 0, 13., ЕҪ1, 0, 14. ЕҪ0, 0, 14.

Dose s 0.75 grkg ЕҪ0, 3, 7., ЕҪ1, 3, 11. ЕҪ0, 2, 9., ЕҪ0, 0, 12. ЕҪ0, 1, 11., ЕҪ0, 3, 10. ЕҪ0, 0, 15., ЕҪ0, 0, 11. ЕҪ2, 0, 8., ЕҪ0, 1, 10. ЕҪ0, 0, 10., ЕҪ0, 1, 13. ЕҪ0, 1, 9., ЕҪ0, 0, 14. ЕҪ1, 1, 11., ЕҪ0, 1, 9. ЕҪ0, 1, 10., ЕҪ0, 0, 15. ЕҪ0, 0, 15., ЕҪ0, 3, 10. ЕҪ0, 2, 5., ЕҪ0, 1, 11. ЕҪ0, 1, 6., ЕҪ1, 1, 8.

Dose s 1.50 grkg ЕҪ0, 8, 2., ЕҪ0, 6, 5. ЕҪ0, 5, 7., ЕҪ0, 11, 2. ЕҪ1, 6, 3., ЕҪ0, 7, 6. ЕҪ0, 0, 1., ЕҪ0, 3, 8. ЕҪ0, 8, 3., ЕҪ0, 2, 12. ЕҪ0, 1, 12., ЕҪ0, 10, 5. ЕҪ0, 5, 6., ЕҪ0, 1, 11. ЕҪ0, 3, 10., ЕҪ0, 0, 13. ЕҪ0, 6, 1., ЕҪ0, 2, 6. ЕҪ0, 1, 2., ЕҪ0, 0, 7. ЕҪ0, 4, 6., ЕҪ0, 0, 12.

Dose s 3.00 grkg ЕҪ0, 4, 3., ЕҪ1, 9, 1. ЕҪ0, 4, 8., ЕҪ1, 11, 0. ЕҪ0, 7, 3., ЕҪ0, 9, 1. ЕҪ0, 3, 1., ЕҪ0, 7, 0. ЕҪ0, 1, 3., ЕҪ0, 12, 0. ЕҪ2, 12, 0., ЕҪ0, 11, 3. ЕҪ0, 5, 6., ЕҪ0, 4, 8. ЕҪ0, 5, 7., ЕҪ2, 3, 9. ЕҪ0, 9, 1., ЕҪ0, 0, 9. ЕҪ0, 5, 4., ЕҪ0, 2, 5. ЕҪ1, 3, 9., ЕҪ0, 2, 5. ЕҪ0, 1, 11.

Source: Study described by C. J. Price, C. A. Kimmel, R. W. Tyl, and M. C. Marr, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 81: 113бҺҗ127 ЕҪ1985..

MULTIVARIATE RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS FOR BINARY DATA

519

TABLE 12.10 Comparisons of Log Likelihoods for Multivariate Random Effects Models for Developmental Toxicity Study

Model

Number of Parameters

Change in Parameters

Change in Log Likelihood

Dose-specific вҢәi

16

бҺҸ

бҺҸ

вҢәi, Common вҗЈ , вҗӨ

14

2

28.4

Common вҢә

7

9

7.4

Common вҢә, вҗі s 0

6

10

7.4

Univariate вҗҙ 2

5

11

16.7

Table 12.10 reports the change in the maximized log likelihood from fitting four special cases of this model:
1. Common intercept and slope for the two logits: вҗЈ1 s вҗЈ2 and вҗӨ1 s вҗӨ2 2. Common covariance matrix for the four doses: вҢә1 s вҢә2 s вҢә3 s вҢә4 3. Common covariance matrix and uncorrelated random effects
4. Univariate common variance component across dose: uiЕҪd.1 s uiЕҪd.2 and вҗҙd s вҗҙ
Tests of the first three special cases against the general model ЕҪ12.17. can use ordinary likelihood-ratio tests. Little seems to be lost by using the simpler model having uncorrelated random effects with homogeneous covariance structure ЕҪi.e., the fourth model listed in Table 12.10., as the likelihood-ratio statistic comparing this to model ЕҪ12.17. equals 2ЕҪ7.4. s 14.8 ЕҪdf s 10.. The model provides a separate univariate logistic-normal model for each conditional binomial outcome, specifying that the proportion of dead pups and the proportion of malformed pups ЕҪgiven survival. are independent, both within litter and marginally.
The univariate model in Table 12.10 is the special case of the third model listed in which the variances are common for the two logits and the random effects are perfectly correlated. Hence, it reduces to a univariate random effects model. Comparing the univariate model to a multivariate counterpart involves testing that correlation parameters fall on the boundary. Ordinary chi-squared asymptotic theory for likelihood-ratio tests applies only when the parameter falls in the interior of the parameter space. Tests when a null model has a correlation of 1 or a variance component of 0 are complex and beyond our scope here ЕҪsee Section 12.6.6.. However, an informal analysis of change in log likelihoods suggests that the univariate model is inadequate.
The ML estimated effects for the separate univariate logistic-normal
model for each conditional binomial outcome are вҗӨЛҶ1 s 0.08 ЕҪSE s 0.21., вҗӨЛҶ2 s 1.79 ЕҪSE s 0.22.. For a given cluster, there is no evidence of a dose
effect on the death rate, but the estimated odds of malformation, given survival, multiply by expЕҪ1.79. s 6.0 for every additional grkg of ethylene

520

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

glycol. The variance component estimates suggest a stronger litter effect for
the malformation outcome given survival ЕҪвҗҙЛҶ2 s 1.6. than for death ЕҪвҗҙЛҶ1 s 0.5..

12.5.3 Hierarchical (Multilevel) Modeling
Hierarchical data structures, with units grouped at different levels, are common in education. A statewide study of factors that affect student performance might measure studentsвҖҷ scores on a battery of exams but use a model that takes into account the student, the school or school district, and the county. Just as two observations on the same student might tend to be more alike than observations on different students, so might two students in the same school tend to be more alike than students from different schools. Student, school, and county terms might be treated as random effects, with different ones referring to different leВ®els of the model. For instance, a model might have students at level 1, schools at level 2, and counties at level 3. GLMMs for data having a hierarchical grouping of this sort are called multileВ®el models. Random effects enter the model at each level of the hierarchy.
We illustrate with a two-level model. Let вҗІiЕҪ j.t denote the probability that student i in school j passes test t in a battery of tests. A multilevel model with random effects for student and school and fixed effects for explanatory variables has the form
logitwвҗІ iЕҪ j.t x s x iX ЕҪ j.tвҗӨ q u j q В®iЕҪ j. .
Here, the explanatory variables x might include one that identifies the test in the battery. The random effects uj for schools and В®iЕҪ j. for students within schools are independent with different variance components. The level 1 random effects Г„В®iЕҪ j.4 account for variability among students in ability or parentsвҖҷ socioeconomic status or other characteristics not measured by x. When they have a relatively large variance component, there is a strong correlation among the test results for students. The level 2 random effects Г„uj4 account for variability among schools due to possibly unmeasured factors such as per-capita expenditure in the schoolвҖҷs budget.
For examples of the use of multivariate random effects in multilevel modeling, see Aitkin et al. ЕҪ1981., Anderson and Aitkin ЕҪ1985., Gibbons and Hedeker ЕҪ1997., Goldstein ЕҪ1995., Goldstein and Rasbash ЕҪ1996., and Longford ЕҪ1993..

12.6 GLMM FITTING, INFERENCE, AND PREDICTION
Model fitting is rather complex for GLMMs. The main difficulty is that the likelihood function does not have a closed form. Numerical methods for approximating it can be computationally intensive for models with multivari-

GLMM FITTING, INFERENCE, AND PREDICTION

521

ate random effects. In this section we outline the basic ideas of ML fitting of GLMMs. Some ML methods are available in software ЕҪe.g., PROC NLMIXED in SAS..

12.6.1 Marginal Likelihood and Maximum Likelihood Fitting
The GLMM is a two-stage model. At the first stage, conditional on the random effects, observations are assumed to follow a GLM. That is, observation yit in cluster i has distribution in the exponential family with expected value вҗ®it linked to a linear predictor,
g ЕҪ вҗ®it . s x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i .
Then, z itX u i is a known offset and observations in a cluster are independent. At the second stage, the random effects Г„u i4 are assumed independent from a NЕҪ0, вҢә. distribution.
For a discrete variable, denote the vector of all the observations by y and the vector of all the random effects by u. Let f ЕҪy < u; вҗӨ. denote the conditional mass function of y, given u. Let f ЕҪu; вҢә. denote the normal density
function for u. The likelihood function l ЕҪвҗӨ, вҢә; y. for a GLMM is the
probability mass function f ЕҪy; вҗӨ, вҢә. of y, viewed as a function of вҗӨ and вҢә. This mass function refers to the marginal distribution of y after integrating out the random effects,
l ЕҪ вҗӨ, вҢә ; y. s f ЕҪy; вҗӨ, вҢә . s Hf ЕҪy < u; вҗӨ. f ЕҪu; вҢә . du. ЕҪ12.18.

It is often called a marginal likelihood. For example, the likelihood function
l ЕҪвҗӨ, вҗҙ 2; y. for the logistic-normal model ЕҪ12.5. ЕҪabsorbing вҗЈ into вҗӨ. is

Еҫ / Пұ expЕҪx itX вҗӨ q ui. yit

ЕҒH ЕҒ

X

1 1yy it

X

f ЕҪ ui ; вҗҙ 2 . dui .

i yПұ t 1 q expЕҪx itвҗӨ q ui .

1 q expЕҪx itвҗӨ q ui .

The likelihood function is evaluated numerically and maximized as a function of вҗӨ and вҢә. Many methods have been developed to do this. We next discuss a few of the most popular.

12.6.2 GaussвҖ“Hermite Quadrature Methods
The integral determining the likelihood function has dimension that depends on the random effects structure. When the dimension is small, as in the one-dimensional integral above for the logistic-normal model ЕҪ12.5., standard numerical integration methods can approximate the likelihood function.

522

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature is a method for approximating the integral of a function f ЕҪРё. multiplied by another function having the shape of a normal density. The approximation is a finite weighted sum that evaluates the function at certain points. In the univariate normal random effects case, the approximation has the form

Пұq

H f ЕҪ u. expЕҪyu2 . du f Гқ ck f ЕҪ sk . ,

yПұ

ks1

with weights Г„ck4 and quadrature points Г„ sk4 that are tabulated. The approximation improves as q, the number of quadrature points, increases.
The approximated likelihood can be maximized with standard algorithms
such as NewtonбҺҗRaphson, yielding ML estimates вҗӨЛҶ and вҢәЛҶ . Inverting an
approximation for the observed information matrix provides standard errors for the ML estimates. For complex models, second partial derivatives for the Hessian may be computed numerically rather than analytically. Adequate
approximation usually requires larger q for standard errors than for вҗӨЛҶ. We
recommend sequentially increasing q until the changes are negligible in both the estimates and standard errors.
An adaptive version of GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature ЕҪe.g., Liu and Pierce 1994. centers the quadrature points with respect to the mode of the function being integrated and scales them according to the estimated curvature at the mode. This improves efficiency, dramatically reducing the number of quadrature points needed to approximate the integrals effectively. Lesaffre and Spiessens ЕҪ2001. showed comparisons and warned against using too few points.

12.6.3 Monte Carlo Methods
Multivariate forms of GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature handle multivariate, correlated random effects. Adequate approximation becomes more difficult, however, when the dimension of the integral exceeds roughly 5. Then, Monte Carlo methods are more feasible computationally than numerical integration. Various Monte Carlo approaches have been studied ЕҪe.g., McCulloch 1997., including Monte Carlo in combination with NewtonбҺҗRaphson, Monte Carlo in combination with the EM algorithm, and simulating the likelihood directly. Here, we briefly describe a Monte Carlo EM ЕҪMCEM. algorithm.
The EM algorithm is a popular iterative method of finding ML estimates when data are missing or when filling in some вҖҳвҖҳmissingвҖҷвҖҷ data simplifies a likelihood ЕҪDempster et al. 1977. wsee Laird ЕҪ1998. for a useful reviewx. In each cycle an E-step takes an expectation over the missing data to approximate the likelihood function and an M-step maximizes the likelihood given the working values of the parameter estimates. In GLMMs, one regards the random effects u as missing data. Then, hЕҪy, u; вҗӨ, вҢә. s f ЕҪy < u; вҗӨ. f ЕҪu; вҢә. specifies the joint distribution of the complete data. The E-step in iteration r

GLMM FITTING, INFERENCE, AND PREDICTION

523

of the EM algorithm calculates

EГ„log hЕҪy, u; вҗӨ , вҢә . < y; вҗӨЕҪr., вҢәЕҪr.4 .

The expectation is with respect to the distribution of ЕҪu < y. with parameter values equal to вҗӨЕҪr. and вҢәЕҪr., the working estimates for iteration r. The distribution of ЕҪu < y. follows from those of ЕҪy < u. and u in the GLMM via BayesвҖҷ theorem. The M-step then maximizes the result with respect to вҗӨ and вҢә to obtain вҗӨЕҪrq1. and вҢәЕҪrq1. .
The MCEM algorithm approximates the expectation in the E-step using Monte Carlo methods. Possible ways of doing this include using independent simulations from the distribution of ЕҪu < y., at the current estimate of parameters, or using Markov chain Monte Carlo ЕҪMCMC.. For details, including the issue of choosing an appropriate Monte Carlo sample size, see Booth and Hobert ЕҪ1999., Chan and Kuk ЕҪ1997., and McCulloch ЕҪ1994, 1997..

12.6.4 Penalized Quasi-likelihood Approximation
The GaussбҺҗHermite and Monte Carlo integration methods provide likelihood approximations such that resulting parameter estimates converge to the ML estimates as they are applied more finely ЕҪi.e., as the number of quadrature points increases for numerical integration and as the Monte Carlo sample size increases in the MCEM method.. This contrasts with other approximate methods that are simpler but need not yield estimates near the ML estimates. These methods maximize an analytical approximation of the likelihood function.
Recall that the likelihood function ЕҪ12.18. results from integrating out the random effects u from the joint distribution of y and u. Using the exponential family representation of each component of that joint distribution, the integrand of ЕҪ12.18. is an exponential function of u. One approach approximates that function using a second-order Taylor series expansion of its
exponent around a point Лңu at which the first-order term equals 0. wThat point Лңu f EЕҪu < y..x The approximating function for the integrand is then exponential with quadratic exponent in ЕҪu y Лңu. and has the form of a constant
multiple of a multivariate normal density. Thus, its integral has closed form. This type of integral approximation is called a Laplace approximation. The approximation for integral ЕҪ12.18. is then treated as a likelihood and maximized with respect to вҗӨ and вҢә.
For one such method ЕҪBreslow and Clayton 1993., the integral approximation yields a function approximating the log likelihood that has the form
qЕҪ вҗӨ , y. y ЕҪ1r2.ЛңuX вҢәy1 Лңu,

524

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

where qЕҪвҗӨ, y. resembles a quasi-log-likelihood function for the GLM condi-
tional on u s Лңu. Thus, the approximation results in a penalty for the quasilog likelihood, with the penalty increasing as elements of Лңu increase in
absolute value. This approach is called penalized quasi-likelihood ЕҪPQL.. The calculations for maximizing the penalized quasi-likelihood use methods for linear mixed models with a normal response. This treats a linearization of the logit as a working response and entails iterative solution of sets of likelihood-like equations in вҗӨ and u. PQL methods do not require numerical or Monte Carlo integration and so are simpler than ML methods. They are computationally feasible for large data sets and models with complex random effects structure.
Unfortunately, PQL methods can perform poorly relative to ML ЕҪMcCulloch 1997.. For instance, for the abortion example in Section 12.3.2, the PQL approximations to the ML estimates ЕҪobtained using the GLIMMIX macro in SAS. are decent for Г„вҗӨt4, but the standard errors and the estimate of вҗҙ are
only about half what they should be ЕҪe.g., PQL gives вҗҙЛҶ s 4.3, compared to
the ML estimate of 8.6.. When true variance components are large, ordinarily PQL tends to produce variance component estimates with substantial negative bias ЕҪBreslow and Lin 1995.. The PQL estimators also behave poorly when the response distribution is far from normal ЕҪe.g., binary.. Adjustments have been developed for some cases to lessen the bias ЕҪe.g., Goldstein and Rasbash 1996., but where possible we recommend using ML rather than PQL.

12.6.5 Bayesian Approaches
Another approach to fitting of GLMMs is Bayesian. With it, the distinction between fixed and random effects no longer occurs, as every effect has a probability distribution. Use of a flat prior distribution yields a posterior that is a constant multiple of the likelihood function. Then, Markov chain Monte Carlo ЕҪMCMC. methods for approximating intractable posterior distributions can approximate the likelihood function ЕҪZeger and Karim 1991.. For instance, an approximation for the mode of the posterior distribution approximates the ML estimate.
A danger is that improper prior distributions have improper posteriors for many models for categorical data ЕҪNatarajan and McCulloch 1995.. In using MCMC, one may fail to realize that the posterior is improper. It is safer to use a proper but relatively diffuse prior. However, the posterior mode need not be close to the ML estimate, and Markov chains may converge slowly ЕҪNatarajan and McCulloch 1998.. This is currently an active area of research, not just as a way of approximating ML results but also as an approach preferred over ML by those who adopt the Bayesian paradigm. See, for instance, Daniels and Gatsonis ЕҪ1999. for multilevel modeling of geographic and temporal trends with clustered longitudinal binary data, which built on earlier hierarchical modeling by Wong and Mason ЕҪ1985..

GLMM FITTING, INFERENCE, AND PREDICTION

525

12.6.6 Inference for Model Parameters

After fitting the model, inference about fixed effects proceeds in the usual

way. For instance, likelihood-ratio tests can compare nested models. Asymp-

totics for GLMMs apply as the number of clusters increases, rather than as

the numbers of observations within the clusters increase. Similarly, resam-

pling methods such as the bootstrap using a large number of clusters should

sample clusters rather than individual observations within clusters, to pre-

serve the within-cluster dependence. Inference about random effects ЕҪe.g., their variance components. is more

complex. For instance, sometimes one model is a special case of another in

which a variance component equals 0. The simpler model then falls on the

boundary of the parameter space relative to the more complex model, so

ordinary likelihood-based inference does not apply. The asymptotic distribu-

tion of the likelihood-ratio statistic is known for the most common situation,

testing H0: вҗҙ 2 s 0 against Ha: вҗҙ 2 ) 0 for a model containing a single variance component. The null distribution is an equal mixture of вҗ№02 ЕҪi.e., degenerate at 0. and вҗ№12 random variables ЕҪSelf and Liang 1987.. The value
of 0 occurs when вҗҙЛҶ s 0, in which case the maximized likelihoods are

identical under H0 and Ha. When вҗҙЛҶ ) 0 and the observed test statistic

equals

t,

the

P-value

for

this

large-sample

test

is

1 2

P

ЕҪ

вҗ№ 12

)

t

.,

half

the

P-value that applies for вҗ№12 asymptotic tests. For testing more than one

variance component, the mixture distribution becomes more complex, and it is simpler to use a score test ЕҪLin 1997..

12.6.7 Prediction Using Random Effects
The use of random effects in a model implies heterogeneity of certain effects of interest, such as odds ratios. Estimated effects of interest are often then linear combinations of fixed and random effects. For example, in the clinical trial comparing two treatments with random effects for centers ЕҪSection 12.3.4., one can predict the probability of success for each treatment in each center and odds ratios in those centers.
Given the data, the conditional distribution of ЕҪu < y. contains the information about the random effects u. A prediction for u is EЕҪu < y., its posterior mean given the data. Calculation of EЕҪu < y. itself requires numerical integration or Monte Carlo approximation. The expectation depends on вҗӨ and вҢә,
so in practice one substitutes вҗӨЛҶ and вҢәЛҶ in the approximation. The standard
error of the predictor of the random effect ui is the standard deviation of the
distribution of ЕҪui < y.. When one substitutes вҗӨЛҶ and вҢәЛҶ in EЕҪu < y., however,
the standard error does not account for the sampling variability in those estimates. Hence, the true standard error tends to be underestimated ЕҪBooth and Hobert 1998..
This approach to prediction using posterior means of random effects provides effect estimates that exhibit shrinkage relative to estimates using

526

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

only data in the specific cluster. In this sense the results are similar to those using an empirical Bayes approach ЕҪTen Have and Localio 1999.. This adapts an ordinary Bayesian analysis by using the sample data to estimate parameters of the prior distribution. For a vector of mean parameters, this approach yields an estimate of a particular mean that is a weighted average of the sample mean and the overall mean of the sample means. Thus, it shrinks the sample mean toward the overall mean. Shrinkage estimators can be far superior to sample values when the sample size for estimating each parameter is small, when there are many parameters to estimate, or when the true parameter values are roughly equal. The empirical Bayes paradigm has been in use for some time: for instance, for estimating a vector of means or binomial proportions ЕҪEfron and Morris 1975..
Although random effects models are natural in many applications, further work is needed. Work continues on the development of methodology for model-fitting and inference with complex GLMMs. In addition, research is needed on model checking and diagnostics. Nonetheless, we believe that GLMMs provide a very useful extension of ordinary GLMs.

NOTES
Section 12.1: Random Effects Modeling of Clustered Categorical Data

12.1. 12.2.

For further discussion of the Rasch model and ways of estimating its parameters, see Andersen ЕҪ1980, Sec. 6.4. and Fischer and Molenaar ЕҪ1995.. Haberman ЕҪ1977b. showed ML estimators can achieve consistency when both n and T grow at suitable rates. For multinomial Rasch extensions, see Andersen ЕҪ1980, pp. 272бҺҗ284; 1995. and Conaway ЕҪ1989.. Early work on random effects models for a categorical response includes Anderson and Aitkin ЕҪ1985., Bartholomew ЕҪ1980., Bock and Aitkin ЕҪ1981., Chamberlain ЕҪ1980., Gilmour et al. ЕҪ1985., Pierce and Sands ЕҪ1975., and Stiratelli et al. ЕҪ1984.. In models with covariates, Neuhaus and Lesperance ЕҪ1996. noted that conditional ML may lose considerable efficiency compared to the random effects approach when cluster sizes are small and covariates have strong positive within-cluster correlation. As that correlation approaches q1, the covariate effect resembles a between-cluster one, which the conditional ML approach cannot estimate. The matched-pairs case referred to in Section 12.1.2 in which the conditional ML estimate equals the random effects estimate has within-cluster covariate correlation s y1, as depending on the order of viewing the observations, xt changes from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0; then, no efficiency loss occurs.

Section 12.3: Examples of Random Effects Models for Binary Data
12.3. For further discussion of modeling captureбҺҗrecapture data, see Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, Chap. 6., Chao et al. ЕҪ2001., Cormack ЕҪ1989., Coull and Agresti ЕҪ1999., Darroch et al. ЕҪ1993., Fienberg et al. ЕҪ1999., and Hook and Regal ЕҪ1995.. Similarities exist between this problem and the related problem of estimating the binomial index n when observing independent bin ЕҪ n, вҗІ . counts with unknown n and вҗІ ; see Aitkin and Stasinopoulos ЕҪ1989. and references therein. Relatively flat log likelihoods also occur with other models that permit capture heterogeneity ЕҪBurnham and Overton 1978., such as a beta-binomial model.

PROBLEMS

527

12.4. King ЕҪ1997. used random effects models as part of a solution for analyzing aggregated categorical data, the problem of ecological inference. Chambers and Steel ЕҪ2001. discussed early work by Leo Goodman on this problem and proposed a simpler semiparametric approach.

Section 12.4: Random Effects Models for Multinomial Data
12.5. With the complementary log-log link, the likelihood function has closed form with a log gamma random effects distribution ЕҪCrouchley 1995, Farewell 1982, Ten Have 1996..
12.6. Chen and Kuo ЕҪ2001. discussed nominal responses, including discrete choice models ЕҪSec. 7.6. with random effects. See also Brownstone and Train ЕҪ1999. for discrete choice GLMMs.

Section 12.5: MultiВ©ariate Random Effects Models for Binary Data

12.7. 12.8.

Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal ЕҪ2001. showed that careful attention must be paid to parameter identification in models with multivariate random effects. Their factor model contains many multivariate random effects models as special cases. For longitudinal bivariate binary responses, Ten Have and Morabia ЕҪ1999. simultaneously modeled bivariate log odds ratios and univariate logits. Multivariate responses sometimes have both continuous and categorical components. For random effects modeling of such data, see Catalano and Ryan ЕҪ1992. and Gueorguieva and Agresti ЕҪ2001..

Section 12.6: GLMM Fitting, Inference, and Prediction

12.9. 12.10.

See Fahrmeir and Tutz ЕҪ2001, Chap. 7. and McCulloch and Searle ЕҪ2001. for more
details on the fitting of GLMMs. Just as the likelihood function for a GLMM is an integral, so do likelihood equations have the form of integral equations ЕҪMcCulloch and Searle 2001, p. 227.. Wolfinger and OвҖҷConnell ЕҪ1993. described a fitting method
related to PQL, also motivated by a Laplace approximation. A GLMM determines the marginal relationship ЕҪaveraged over random effects. between the mean response and explanatory variables. Conversely, Heagerty ЕҪ1999.
noted that a marginal model for the mean implicitly determines the form of the fixed portion of the linear predictor in a conditional model. The conditional GLMM ЕҪ12.1. has linear predictor, x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i. A more general form вҢ¬ it q z itX u i implies a particular marginal model. Here, вҢ¬ it is a function of the marginal linear predictor and the random effects distribution. It is implicitly defined by the integral equation that links
the marginal and conditional means.

PROBLEMS
Applications
12.1 Refer to the matched-pairs data of Table 10.14 and Problem 10.1.
a. Fit model ЕҪ12.3.. Interpret вҗӨЛҶ. If your software uses numerical integration, report вҗӨЛҶ, вҗҙЛҶ, and their standard errors for 5, 10, 25,
100, and 200 quadrature points, and comment on convergence.

528

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

b. Compare вҗӨЛҶ and its SE for this approach to the conditional ML
approach.
12.2 Refer to Table 4.8 on the free-throw shooting of Shaq OX Neal. In game i, suppose that yi s number made out of ni attempts is a bin ЕҪ ni,вҗІi. variate and Г„ yi4 are independent.
a. Fit the model, logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ. Find and interpret вҗІЛҶi. Does the
model appear to fit adequately? b. Fit the model, logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ q ui, where Г„ui4 are independent
NЕҪ0,вҗҙ 2 .. Use вҗЈЛҶ and вҗҙЛҶ to summarize OX NealвҖҷs free-throw shoot-
ing. c. Explain how the model in part ЕҪa. is a special case of that in part
ЕҪb.. Is there evidence that the one in part ЕҪb. fits better?

12.3 For Table 8.3, let yit s 1 when subject i used substance t. Table 12.11 shows output for the logistic-normal model
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s ui q вҗӨt .
Interpret. Illustrate by comparing use of cigarettes and marijuana.

TABLE 12.11 Output for Problem 12.3

Description Subjects Max Obs Per Subject Parameters Quadrature Points Log Likelihood

Value 2276 3 4 200
y3311

Parameter beta1 beta2 beta3 sigma

Estimate 4.2227 1.6209
y0.7751 3.5496

Std Error 0.1824 0.1207 0.1061 0.1627

t Value 23.15 13.43 y7.31 21.82

12.4 How is the focus different for the model in Problem 12.3 than for the
loglinear model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . used in Section 8.2.4? If вҗҙЛҶ s 0,
which loglinear model has the same fit as the GLMM?
12.5 For the student survey in Table 9.1, ЕҪa. analyze using GLMMs, and ЕҪb. compare results and interpretations to those with marginal models in Problem 11.2.
12.6 Fit model ЕҪ12.10. to the responses on abortion. If your software uses GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature, report the approximate number of quadrature points needed for parameter estimates to converge and the number needed for standard error estimates to converge. ЕҪThis
example has large вҗҙЛҶ and requires many points..

PROBLEMS

529

12.7 For the crossover study in Table 11.10 ЕҪProblem 11.6., fit the model

logit P ЕҪ YiЕҪk.t s 1 < uiЕҪk. . s вҗЈk q вҗӨt q uiЕҪk. ,

ЕҪ 12 .19.

where Г„uiЕҪk.4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. Interpret Г„вҗӨЛҶt4 and вҗҙЛҶ.
12.8 For Problem 12.7, compare estimates of вҗӨB y вҗӨA and вҗӨC y вҗӨA and SE values to those using ЕҪa. a marginal model ЕҪProblem 11.6., and ЕҪb. conditional logistic regression ЕҪSection 10.2., treating subject terms in model ЕҪ12.19. as fixed effects.

12.9 For Problem 12.7, fit the more general GLMM having treatment effects Г„вҗӨtk4 that vary by sequence. Test whether the fit is better. One could also consider period or carryover effects. Add two period effects to model ЕҪ12.19. ЕҪe.g., the first-period-effect parameter adds to
the model when t s A and k s 1, 2, t s B and k s 3, 4, and t s C and k s 5, 6.. Check whether the fit improves. Interpret.

12.10

Consider the logistic-normal model ЕҪ12.10. for the abortion opinion data, under the constraint вҗҙ s 0.
a. Explain why the fit is the same as an ordinary logit model treating the three responses for each subject as if they were independent responses for three separate subjects.
b. Explain why the model fit is the same as an ordinary loglinear model ЕҪGI1, GI2 , GI3. of mutual independence of responses on the three items ЕҪ I1, I2 , I3., given G s gender.
c. Fit the model. Interpret, and explain why Г„вҗӨЛҶt y вҗӨЛҶu4 are quite
different from those in Section 12.3.2 allowing вҗҙ ) 0.

12.11

For Table 6.7 on admissions decisions for graduate school applicants, let yi g s 1 denote a subject in department i of gender g ЕҪ1 s females, 0 s males. being admitted. a. For the fixed effects model, logitw PЕҪYi g s 1.x s вҗЈ q вҗӨ g q вҗӨiD,
вҗӨЛҶs 0.173 ЕҪSE s 0.112.. Interpret.
b. The corresponding model ЕҪ12.12. in which departments are a
normal random effect has вҗӨЛҶs 0.163 ЕҪSE s 0.111.. Interpret.
c. The model of form ЕҪ12.12. allowing the gender effect to vary by
department has вҗӨЛҶs 0.176 ЕҪSE s 0.132., with вҗҙЛҶb s 0.20. Interpret. Explain why the standard error of вҗӨЛҶ is slightly larger than
with the other analyses.
d. The marginal sample log odds ratio between gender and whether
admitted equals y0.07. How could this take different sign from вҗӨЛҶ
in these models?

530

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

12.12

e. The sample conditional odds ratios between gender and whether admitted vary between 0 and Пұ. By contrast, predicted odds ratios for the interaction random effects model do not vary much. Explain why results can be so different.
For the clinical trial in Table 9.16, let вҗІit s PЕҪYit s 1 < ui. denote the probability of success for treatment t in center i.
a. The random intercept model ЕҪ12.11. has вҗӨЛҶs 1.52 ЕҪSE s 0.70. and вҗҙЛҶ s 1.9. Interpret.
b. From Section 9.8.3, the fixed effects analog of this model ЕҪreplac-
ing вҗЈ q ui by вҗЈi. has вҗЈЛҶ1 s вҗЈЛҶ3 s yПұ, corresponding to вҗІЛҶ 1t s вҗІЛҶ 3t
s 0 for each treatment. By contrast, the random effects model has
вҗЈЛҶ q uЛҶ1 s y3.78 ЕҪusing NLMIXED in SAS. and вҗІЛҶ 11 s 0.047 and вҗІЛҶ 12 s 0.011 in center 1. Explain how this model can have вҗІЛҶit ) 0
in centers having no successes.

12.13 12.14

Refer to the subject-specific model in Section 12.3.3. Verify that the estimated difference in time effect slopes between the new and standard drugs for treating depression are ЕҪa. 1.018 ЕҪSE s 0.192. with the GLMM approach, and ЕҪb. 1.156 ЕҪSE s 0.222. with conditional ML.
For marginal model ЕҪ10.14. for Table 10.5 on premarital and extramarital sex, Table 12.12 shows results of fitting a corresponding
random intercept model. Interpret вҗӨЛҶ. Compare estimates of and
inferences about вҗӨ to those in Section 10.3.2 for the marginal model.

TABLE 12.12 Output for Problem 12.14

Subjects Max Obs Per Subject Parameters Quadrature Points Log Likelihood

475 2 5
100 y890.1

Parameter inter1 inter2 inter3 beta sigma

Estimate y1.5422 y0.6682
0.9273 4.1342 2.0757

Std Error 0.1826 0.1578 0.1673 0.3296 0.2487

t Value y8.45 y4.24
5.54 12.54
8.35

12.15

A data set from the 1994 General Social Survey on subjectsвҖҷ opinions on four items ЕҪthe environment, health, law enforcement, education. related to whether they believed government spending on each item should increase, stay the same, or decrease. Subjects were also classified by their gender and race. For subject i, let Gi s 1 for females and 0 for males, let R1i s 1 for whites and 0 otherwise,

PROBLEMS

531

R2 i s 1 for blacks and 0 otherwise, and R1i s R2 i s 0 for the other category of race. Let yit denote the response for subject i on spending item t, where outcomes ЕҪ1, 2, 3. represent ЕҪincrease, stay the same, decrease.. a. With constraint вҗӨ4 s 0, the random-intercept model
logit P ЕҪ Yit F j < ui .
s вҗЈj q вҗӨt q вҗӨgGi q вҗӨr1 Ri1 q вҗӨr2 R2 i q ui , j s 1, 2,
has вҗӨЛҶ1 s y0.55, вҗӨЛҶ2 s y0.60, вҗӨЛҶ3 s y0.49, with вҗҙЛҶ s 1.03. These
estimates are greater than five standard errors in absolute value. Interpret.
b. Table 12.13 shows results with a race-by-item interaction. Interpret.

TABLE 12.13 Results for Problem 12.15 a

Variable

Estimate

SE

Intercept-1

1.065

0.391

Intercept-2

1.919

0.051

Gender

0.409

0.088

Race1-w

y0.055

0.397

Race2-b

0.434

0.452

Item1-envir

y0.357

0.539

Item2-health

y0.319

0.493

Item3-crime

y0.585

0.480

Race1)Item1 Race1)Item2 Race1)Item3 Race2)Item1 Race2)Item2 Race2)Item3

y0.170 y0.387
0.197 y0.452
0.454 y0.518

0.549 0.503 0.491 0.606 0.598 0.560

aCoding 0 for item 4 ЕҪeducation. and race 3 ЕҪother..

12.16

Refer to Problem 11.12 for Table 8.19 on government spending. Analyze these data using a cumulative logit model with random effects. Interpret. Compare results to those with a marginal model ЕҪProblem 11.12..

12.17

For the insomnia example in Section 12.4.2, according to SAS the maximized log likelihood equals y593.0, compared to y621.0 for the simpler model forcing вҗҙ s 0. Compare models, using either a likelihood-ratio test or AIC. What do you conclude?

532

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

TABLE 12.14 Results for Problem 12.18

Observer Effect
A B C D E F

GEE y0.451 ЕҪ0.108. y0.391 ЕҪ0.093.
0.319 ЕҪ0.118. 0.632 ЕҪ0.105. y0.491 ЕҪ0.098. 1.252 ЕҪ0.161.

Random Effects
y1.201 ЕҪ0.300. y0.919 ЕҪ0.299.
0.558 ЕҪ0.301. 1.545 ЕҪ0.313. y1.379 ЕҪ0.300. 2.907 ЕҪ0.344.

12.18

Landis and Koch ЕҪ1977. showed ratings by seven pathologists who separately classified 118 slides regarding the presence and extent of carcinoma of the uterine cervix, using a five-point ordinal scale. ЕҪTable 13.1 is a collapsing of their table that combines the first two categories and the last three categories.. For slide i with rater t, Table 12.14 shows results of fitting model
logit P ЕҪ Yit F j < ui . s ui q вҗЈj q вҗӨt
to the ordinal table ЕҪwith вҗӨЛҶG s 0., assuming that the Г„ui4 are inde-
pendent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. It also shows GEE estimates, using independence working equations, for the corresponding marginal model. Interpret
вҗӨЛҶF for each model. Explain why estimates using the random effects model, for which вҗҙЛҶ s 3.8, tend to be much larger in absolute value.
Discuss the differences in assumptions and interpretations for the two models.

12.19

Refer to Section 12.5.1 on boysвҖҷ attitudes toward the leading crowd. Table 12.15 shows results for a sample of schoolgirls. Fit model ЕҪ12.16. and interpret. Summarize the estimated variability and correlation of random effects.

TABLE 12.15 Data for Problem 12.19

ЕҪ M, A. for First Interview

ЕҪYes, Positive.

ЕҪ M, A. for Second Interview a ЕҪYes, Negative. ЕҪNo, Positive.

ЕҪNo, Negative.

Yes, positive

484

93

107

32

Yes, negative

112

110

30

46

No, positive

129

40

768

321

No, negative

74

75

303

536

aM, membership; A, attitude. Source: J. S. Coleman, Introduction to Mathematical Sociology ЕҪLondon: Free Press of Glencoe, 1964., p. 168.

PROBLEMS

533

12.20

Generalize model ЕҪ12.16. to apply simultaneously to Tables 12.8 and 12.15, using a gender main effect but the same membership effect and the same attitude effect for each gender. Fit the model. Use the maximized log likelihood to compare with a more general model having different membership effects and different attitude effects for each gender. Interpret.

12.21

Table 12.16 reports results from a study to estimate the number N of people infected during a 1995 hepatitis A outbreak in Taiwan. The 271 observed cases were reported from records based on a serum test taken by the Institute of Preventive Medicine of Taiwan ЕҪP., records reported by the National Quarantine Service ЕҪQ., and records based on questionnaires administered by epidemiologists ЕҪE.. Estimating N is difficult, because many subjects had only one capture.
a. Find NЛҶ if you observed only ЕҪi. P and Q, ЕҪii. P and E, ЕҪiii. Q and
E.
b. Find NЛҶ using the model of mutual independence with P, Q, and E.
c. Find a 95% profile likelihood interval for N using the model in part ЕҪb..
d. The random effects model of Section 12.3.6 has fit shown in Table
12.16, for which вҗҙЛҶ s 2.9. The log-likelihood is relatively flat, and NЛҶ s 4551 with a 95% profile likelihood interval of ЕҪ758, Пұ. ЕҪCoull
and Agresti 1999.. Explain why this model may provide imprecise estimates of N. Since the interval in part ЕҪc. is much narrower, is it necessarily more reliable?

TABLE 12.16 Data for Problem 12.21

PQE

Observed Count

Logistic-Normal ML Fit

000

бҺҸ

001

63

010

55

011

18

100

69

101

17

110

21

111

28

ЕҪ487, Пұ. 61.0 58.0 17.0 68.0 20.0 19.0 28.0

Source: Data from Chao et al. ЕҪ2001..

12.22 Analyze the crossover data of Table 11.1 using a random effects approach. Interpret, and compare results to those in Section 11.1.2.

534

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

12.23

The analyses in Section 12.3.2 comparing opinions on some topic extend to ordinal responses. Using an ordinal random effects model, analyze the 43 table in Agresti ЕҪ1993., found also at the bookвҖҷs Web site, www. stat.ufl.edur; aarcdarcda.html.

12.24

The analyses in Section 12.3.4 describing heterogeneity in multicenter clinical trials extend to ordinal responses. Using random effects models, analyze the 2 = 3 = 8 table in Hartzel et al. ЕҪ2001a..

12.25

You are a statistical consultant asked to analyze Table 4 in B. Efron, Statistical Science 13: 95бҺҗ122 ЕҪ1998., which shows 2 = 2 tables from a clinical trial in 41 cities. Analyze, and write a report summarizing your analysis.

12.26

Analyze Table 11.9 with age and maternal smoking as predictors using a ЕҪa. logistic-normal model, ЕҪb. marginal model, and ЕҪc. transitional model. Explain how the interpretation of the maternal smoking effect differs for the three approaches.

Theory and Methods

12.27

Refer to Section 12.3.1. Using supplementary information improves predictions. Let qi denote the true proportion of votes for Clinton in state i in the 1992 election, conditional on voting for him or Bush. Consider the model
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s logitЕҪ qi . q вҗЈ q ui ,
where Г„qi4 are known and Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0,вҗҙ 2 .. When
вҗҙЛҶ s 0, show вҗІЛҶi s qi exp ЕҪвҗЈЛҶ.rw1 y qi q qi exp ЕҪвҗЈЛҶ.x. Compared to Г„qi4, explain how вҗІЛҶi then shifts up or down depending on how the overall
Democratic vote compares in the current poll to the previous election
ЕҪi.e., depending on вҗЈЛҶ.. When also вҗЈЛҶ s 0, show вҗІЛҶi s qi.

12.28

For a binary response, consider the random effects model
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q вҗӨt q ui , t s 1, . . . , T ,
where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 ., and the marginal model
logit P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s вҗЈ q вҗӨt* , t s 1, . . . , T .

For identifiability, вҗӨT s вҗӨT* s 0. Explain why all вҗӨt s 0 implies that all вҗӨt* s 0. Is the converse true?

PROBLEMS

535

12.29

The GLMM for binary data using probit link function is
вҢҪy1 P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < u i . s x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i ,
where вҢҪ is the NЕҪ0, 1. cdf and u i has NЕҪ0, вҢә. pdf, f ЕҪu i; вҢә.. a. Show that the marginal mean is

P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s HP ЕҪ Z y z itX u i F x itX вҗӨ . f ЕҪu i ; вҢә . du i ,

where Z is a standard normal variate that is independent of u i. b. Since Z y z itX u i has a NЕҪ0, 1 q z iX t вҢә z it . distribution, deduce that
вҢҪy1 P ЕҪ Yt s 1. s x itX вҗӨw1 q z itX вҢә z it xy1r2 .

Hence, the marginal model is a probit model with attenuated effect. In the univariate random intercept case, show the marginal
effect equals that from the GLMM divided by '1 q вҗҙ 2 .

12.30

In the Rasch model, logitw PЕҪYit s 1.x s вҗЈi q вҗӨt , вҗЈi is a fixed effect. a. Assuming independence of responses for different subjects and for
different observations on the same subject, show that the log likelihood is

Гқ Гқ вҗЈi yit q Гқ Гқ вҗӨt yit y Гқ Гқ log 1 q expЕҪвҗЈi q вҗӨt . .

it

it

it

b. Show that the likelihood equations are yqt s Гқi PЕҪYit s 1. and yiqs Гқt PЕҪYit s 1. for all i and t. Explain why conditioning on Г„ yiq4 yields a distribution that does not depend on Г„вҗЈi4.
c. Discuss advantages and disadvantages of, instead, treating вҗЈi as random.

12.31

Consider the matched-pairs random effects model ЕҪ12.3.. For given
вҗӨ0 , let вҗҰ0 be such that вҗ®ЛҶ12 s n12 q вҗҰ0 and вҗ®ЛҶ21 s n21 y вҗҰ0 satisfies logЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ21rвҗ®ЛҶ12 . s вҗӨ0. Suppose Г„вҗ®ЛҶi j4 has nonnegative log odds ratio.
Explain why:

a. This is the fit of the model assuming вҗӨ s вҗӨ0.

b. The likelihood-ratio statistic for testing H0: вҗӨ s вҗӨ0 in this model equals

Еҫ / n12

n21

2 n12 log n12 q вҗҰ0 q n21 log n21 y вҗҰ0 .

c. The likelihood-ratio test of H0: вҗӨ s 0 is the test of symmetry.

536

RANDOM EFFECTS: GENERALIZED LINEAR MIXED MODELS

12.32 Explain why the logistic-normal model is not helpful for captureбҺҗ recapture experiments with only two captures.

12.33

Refer to the crossover study in Problem 12.7. Kenward and Jones ЕҪ1991. reported results using the ordinal response scale ЕҪnone, moderate, complete. for relief. Explain how to formulate an ordinal logit random effects model for these data analogous to model ЕҪ12.19..

12.34 Formulate a model using adjacent-categories logits that is analogous to model ЕҪ12.14. for cumulative logits. Interpret parameters.

12.35 For ordinal square I = I tables of counts Г„nab4, model ЕҪ12.3. for binary matched-pairs responses ЕҪYi1, Yi2 . for subject i extends to
logit P ЕҪ Yit F j < ui . s вҗЈj q вҗӨ xt q ui

with Г„ui4 independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . variates and x1 s 0 and x2 s 1. a. Explain how to interpret вҗӨ, and compare to the interpretation of
вҗӨ in the corresponding marginal model ЕҪ10.14.. b. This model implies model ЕҪ12.3. for each 2 = 2 collapsing that
combines categories 1 through j for one outcome and categories
j q 1 through I for the other. Use the form of the conditional ML ЕҪor random effects ML. estimator for binary matched pairs to
explain why

Еҫ / log Гқ Гқ nab a)j b-j

Еҫ / Гқ Гқ nab a-j b)j

is a consistent estimator of вҗӨ. c. Treat these ЕҪ I y 1. collapsed 2 = 2 tables naively as if they are
independent samples. Show that adding the numerators and adding the denominators of the separate estimates of e вҗӨ motivates the
summary estimator of вҗӨ,

ВҪ вҗӨЛңs log

Гқ ЕҪ a y b. nab
a)b

5 Гқ ЕҪ b y a. nab .
b)a

Explain why вҗӨЛң is consistent for вҗӨ even recognizing the actual
dependence.
d. A standard error for вҗӨЛң that treats the collapsed tables in part ЕҪc.
as independent is inappropriate. Treating Г„nab4 as a multinomial
sample, show that an estimated asymptotic variance of вҗӨЛң is ЕҪAgresti

PROBLEMS

537

and Lang 1993a.

ВҪ 5 Гқ ЕҪ b y a.2 nab b)a

2
Гқ ЕҪ b y a. nab
b)a

ВҪ 5 q Гқ ЕҪ a y b.2 nab a)b

2
Гқ ЕҪ a y b. nab .
a)b

12.36

Summarize advantages and disadvantages of using a GLMM approach compared to a marginal model approach. Describe conditions under which parameter estimators are consistent for ЕҪa. marginal models using GEE, ЕҪb. marginal models using ML, ЕҪc. GLMM using PQL, and ЕҪd. GLMM using ML.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 13
Other Mixture Models for Categorical Data*
In Chapters 10 through 12 we introduced ways of handling correlated observations due to repeated measurement and other forms of clustering. The generalized linear mixed models ЕҪGLMMs. of Chapter 12 assume normal random effects. They describe heterogeneity by replacing the linear predictor by a normally distributed mixture of linear predictors. In this chapter we present additional models having connections with GLMMs. Except for one case, these models use nonnormal mixture distributions.
In Section 13.1 we present latent class models. These treat a contingency table as a mixture of unobserved tables at categories of a qualitative latent ЕҪunobserved. variable. In Section 13.2 we discuss a related nonparametric approach to fitting GLMMs that uses an unspecified discrete quantitative distribution for the random effects distribution.
In Section 13.3 we model clustered binomial responses using the beta distribution to describe heterogeneity of binomial parameters. The resulting beta-binomial distribution has variance function for which quasi-likelihood methods are also available. In Section 13.4 we model count responses using the gamma distribution to describe heterogeneity of Poisson parameters. The resulting negative binomial regression model corresponds to a Poisson GLMM having a log-gamma distributed random effect. It is an alternative to the GLMM for Poisson responses with normal random effects, a model discussed in Section 13.5.
13.1 LATENT CLASS MODELS
GLMMs create a mixture of linear predictor values using a latent variable, the unobserved random effect vector, having a normal distribution. By contrast, latent class models use a mixture distribution that is qualitative rather than quantitative. The basic model assumes existence of a latent 538

LATENT CLASS MODELS

539

FIGURE 13.1 Association graph for latent class model.

categorical variable such that the observed response variables are conditionally independent, given that variable.
For categorical response variables ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , YT ., the latent class model assumes a latent categorical variable Z such that for each possible sequence of response outcomes ЕҪ y1, . . . , yT . and each category z of Z,
P ЕҪ Y1 s y1 , . . . , YT s yT < Z s z . s P ЕҪ Y1 s y1 < Z s z . РёРёРё P ЕҪ YT s yT < Z s z . .

Figure 13.1 shows the association graph for the model. A latent class model summarizes probabilities of classification PЕҪ Z s z. in the latent classes as well as conditional probabilities PЕҪYt s yt < Z s z. of outcomes for each Yt within each latent class. These are the model parameters. More generally, the latent variable Z can be multivariate. The model is an analog for categorical responses and latent variables of the factor analysis model for multivariate normal responses.
The latent class model is sometimes plausible when the observed variables are several indicators of some concept, such as prejudice, religiosity, or opinion about an issue. An example is Table 10.13, in which subjects gave their opinions about whether abortion should be legal in various situations. Perhaps an underlying latent variable describes oneвҖҷs basic attitude toward legalized abortion, such that given the value of that latent variable, responses on the observed variables are conditionally independent. For instance, the latent variable may be a qualitative variable with three categories: One class for those who always oppose legalized abortion regardless of the situation, one for those who always favor it, and one for those whose response depends on the situation.
The T-dimensional contingency table cross classifying ЕҪY1, . . . , YT . is observed. The ЕҪT q 1.-dimensional table that cross-classifies it with the latent variable is an unobserved table. Denote the number of categories of each Yt by I and the number of latent classes of Z by q. For the observed table, let вҗІy1, . . . , yT s PЕҪY1 s y1, . . . , YT s yT .. The model assumes a multinomial distribution over its I T cells. For a given cell,

q
вҗІy1, . . . , yT s Гқ
zs1

P ЕҪ Y1 s y1 , . . . , YT s yT < Z s z . P ЕҪ Z s z . .

540

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

The conditional independence factorization for the latent class model states that

q
вҗІy1, . . . , yT s Гқ
zs1

T
ЕҒ P ЕҪ Yt s yt < Z s z . P ЕҪ Z s z . .
ts1

ЕҪ 13 .1.

This is a nonlinear model for the I T multinomial probabilities.

13.1.1 Fitting Latent Class Models Denote the counts in the observed table by Г„ n y1, . . . , yT 4. Summing over the I T cells in that table, the kernel of the multinomial log likelihood is

Гқ n y1 , . . . , yT log вҗІy1 , . . . , yT .

ЕҪ 13 .2.

Substituting parameters from ЕҪ13.1., one can maximize ЕҪ13.2. with respect to those parameters using NewtonбҺҗRaphson ЕҪHaberman 1979, Chap. 10. or the EM algorithm ЕҪGoodman 1974.. It is helpful to note that the latent class model states that the loglinear model symbolized by ЕҪY1 Z, Y2 Z, . . . , YT Z. holds for the unobserved table. The model makes no assumption about the Г„Yt Z4 associations but assumes that the Г„Yt4 are mutually independent within each category of Z.
The EM algorithm has two steps in each iteration. The E ЕҪexpectation. step in iteration s calculates pseudo-counts Г„ nЕҪ s. y1, . . . , yT, z4 for the unobserved table using Г„ n y1, . . . , yT 4 and a working conditional distribution for ЕҪ Z < Y1, . . . , YT . described shortly. The M ЕҪmaximization. step treats Г„ nЕҪ s. y1, . . . , yT, z4 as data and applies an algorithm such as iterative reweighted least squares or IPF for fitting the model ЕҪi.e., the loglinear model ЕҪY1 Z, Y2 Z, . . . , YT Z... The fit Г„вҗ®ЕҪ s. y1, . . . , . . . , yT, z4 of that model in the unobserved table then determines the new working conditional distribution of ЕҪ Z < Y1, . . . , YT . to apply to Г„ n y1, . . . , yT 4 for the E-step of the next iteration. This allocates the observed data to pseudo-counts in the unobserved cells in
proportion to this fit, using

n y1 , . . . , yT , z ЕҪ sq1. s n y1 , . . . , yT

Гқвҗ® y1 , . . . , yT , z ЕҪ s.

q

.

вҗ® y1 , . . . , yT , k ЕҪ s.

ks1

These are entries in the unobserved table for iteration ЕҪ s q 1.. They are used as pseudo-data for the M-step of iteration ЕҪ s q 1..
Eventually, the algorithm converges to fitted values for the unobserved table that provide fitted probabilities that satisfy mutual independence within each latent class, and such that the corresponding fitted probabilities in the observed table ЕҪi.e., added over the latent categories. maximize the likelihood ЕҪ13.2.. The fitted probabilities in the unobserved table are an estimated joint

LATENT CLASS MODELS

541

distribution for ЕҪY1, . . . , YT , Z.. One can use them to calculate the ML estimates of the latent class model parameters Г„ PЕҪYt s yt < Z s z.4 and Г„ PЕҪ Z s z.4.
The EM algorithm is computationally simple and relatively stable. Each iteration increases the likelihood. However, its convergence can be slow. See Laird ЕҪ1998. for a review. The log likelihood for a latent class model may have local maxima. Thus, with either the NewtonбҺҗRaphson or EM algorithm, it is advisable to perform the fitting process a few times with different starting guesses for the parameter values. The EM algorithm tends to be less sensitive to the choice of starting values. Thus, some software begins with the EM algorithm and then switches to the NewtonбҺҗRaphson algorithm as it approaches the ML estimates to speed the process. As q increases, multiple local maxima are more likely and the danger increases of a lack of identifiability.
Standard errors for model parameter estimates result from inverting the modelвҖҷs estimated information matrix. This is a by-product of the NewtonбҺҗRaphson algorithm but not the EM algorithm. One way to obtain standard errors with it applies a useful formula of Louis ЕҪ1982. for the observed information when using the EM algorithm. It equals the expected value of the observed information for the loglinear model for the unobserved table minus the expected value of the information for the conditional distribution of Z given the observed data. Baker ЕҪ1992. and Lang ЕҪ1992. gave related results.
Chi-squared statistics comparing observed cell counts to fitted values test the model fit. The residual df s I T y qT ЕҪ I y 1. y q. This follows since multinomial model ЕҪ13.1. describes I T y 1 multinomial probabilities using ЕҪ I y 1. parameters Г„ PЕҪYt s yt < Z s z., yt s 1, . . . , I y 14 at each of qT combinations of z and t, and q y 1 parameters Г„ PЕҪ Z s z.4. Often, the nature of the variables suggests a value for q, usually quite small ЕҪ2 to 4.. Otherwise, the usual procedure starts with q s 2; if the fit is inadequate, it increases by steps of 1 as long as the fit shows substantive improvement. Specialized software exists for such models ЕҪAppendix A..

13.1.2 Latent Class Model for Rater Agreement
Table 13.1 is an expanded data set of the example in Section 10.5. Seven pathologists classified each of 118 slides on the presence or absence of carcinoma in the uterine cervix. For modeling interobserver agreement, the conditional independence assumption of the latent class model is often plausible. With a blind rating scheme, ratings of a given subject or unit by different pathologists are independent. If subjects having true rating in a given category are relatively homogeneous, then ratings by different pathologists may be nearly independent within a given true rating class. Thus, one might posit a latent class model with q s 2 classes, one for subjects whose true rating is positive and one for subjects whose true rating is negative. This

542

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE 13.1 Diagnoses of Carcinoma and Fits of Latent Class Modelsa

Pathologist

Fit

A B C D E F G Count q s 1 q s 2 q s 3

0 00 0 00 0

34

0 00 0 10 0

2

0 10 0 00 0

6

0 10 0 00 1

1

0 10 0 10 0

4

0 10 0 10 1

5

1 00 0 00 0

2

1 01 0 10 1

1

1 10 0 00 0

2

1 10 0 00 1

1

1 10 0 10 0

2

1 10 0 10 1

7

1 10 0 11 1

1

1 10 1 00 1

1

1 10 1 10 1

2

1 10 1 11 1

3

1 11 0 10 1

13

1 11 0 11 1

5

1 11 1 10 1

10

1 11 1 11 1

16

1.1

23.0

33.8

1.6

6.6

2.0

2.2

12.7

6.3

2.8

1.7

1.5

3.3

3.6

3.0

4.2

0.5

4.7

1.4

3.0

2.1

1.6

0.2

0.2

2.8

1.7

1.3

3.5

0.3

1.6

4.2

0.5

2.9

5.3

3.7

6.5

1.4

2.6

1.4

1.3

0.1

0.1

2.0

4.3

2.6

0.5

3.1

2.0

3.3

11.5

9.6

0.9

8.4

8.7

1.2

13.5

13.6

0.3

9.9

12.3

aFits obtained with Latent Gold ЕҪStatistical Innovations, Belmont MA.. 1, yes; 0, no. Source: Based on data in Landis and Koch ЕҪ1977., not showing empty cells.

model expresses the 27 joint distribution of the seven ratings as a mixture of two 27 distributions, one for each true rating class.
Table 13.2 shows results of fitting some latent class models ЕҪincluding a mixture model studied in Section 13.2.4.. Because the observed table is sparse, the deviance is mainly useful for comparing models. This is an informal comparison, though, since the chi-squared distribution does not apply for comparing deviances of models with different numbers of latent classes. A model with q classes is a special case of a model with q* ) q classes in which PЕҪ Z s z. s 0 for z ) q and hence falls on the boundary of the parameter space. Ordinary chi-squared likelihood-ratio tests require parameters to fall in the interior of the parameter space ЕҪi.e., 0 - PЕҪ Z s z. - 1 for z s 1, . . . , q*..
Table 13.1 also shows the fitted values for latent class models with q s 1, 2, 3, for the cells having positive counts. ЕҪEach empty cell also has a fitted value, not shown here.. The model with q s 1 latent class is the model of mutual independence of the seven ratings. Equivalently, it is the loglinear model ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , Y7.. It fits poorly, as one would expect. With q s 2, considerable evidence remains of lack of fit. For instance, the fitted count for

LATENT CLASS MODELS

TABLE 13.2 Likelihood-Ratio Statistics for Latent Class Models Fitted to Table 13.1a

Number of Latent Classes

Model

Deviance ЕҪG2. Statistic

1

Mutual independence

476.8

2

Latent class

62.4

Rasch mixture

67.6

3

Latent class

15.3

Rasch mixture

27.5

4

Latent class

6.4

Rasch mixture ЕҪquasi-symmetry.

23.7

aModels fitted with Latent Gold ЕҪStatistical Innovations, Belmont, MA..

543
df 120 112 118 104 116 96 114

a negative rating by each pathologist is 23.0, compared to an observed count of 34. ЕҪThe small G2 that Table 13.2 reports for this model does not imply a good fit; in Section 9.8.4 we noted that G2 tends to be highly conservative when most fitted values are very close to 0.. The model with q s 3 seems to fit adequately.
Studying the estimated probability PЕҪYt s 1 < Z s z. of a carcinoma diagnosis for each pathologist, conditional on a given latent class z, helps illuminate the nature of these classes. Table 13.3 reports these for the three-class model. They suggest that ЕҪ1. the first latent class refers to cases that all pathologists ЕҪexcept occasionally B. agree show no carcinoma; ЕҪ2. the third latent class refers to cases in which A, B, E, and G agree show carcinoma and C and D usually agree; and ЕҪ3. the second latent class refers to cases of strong disagreement, whereby C, D, and F rarely diagnose carcinoma but B, E, and G usually do. The estimated proportions in the
three latent classes are PЛҶЕҪ Z s 1. s 0.37, PЛҶЕҪ Z s 2. s 0.18, and PЛҶЕҪ Z s 3. s
0.45. The model estimates that 18% of the cases fall in the problematic class.

TABLE 13.3 Estimated Probabilities of Diagnosing Carcinoma, for Latent Class Model and Rasch Mixture Model with Three Classesa

Latent

Pathologist

Model

Class

A

B

C

D

E

F

Latent Class

1

0.057 0.138 0.000 0.000 0.055

2

0.513 1.00 0.000 0.058 0.751

3

1.000 0.981 0.858 0.586 1.000

Rasch

1

0.022 0.150 0.001 0.000 0.047

Mixture

2

0.611 0.923 0.052 0.015 0.774

3

0.994 0.999 0.853 0.617 0.997

aResults obtained with Latent Gold ЕҪStatistical Innovations, Belmont, MA..

0.000 0.000 0.476
0.000 0.009 0.483

G
0.000 0.631 1.000
0.022 0.611 0.994

544

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

A danger with latent variable models, shared by factor analysis for continuous responses, is the temptation to interpret latent variables too literally. In this example it is tempting to treat latent class 1 ЕҪlatent class 3. as cases truly without carcinoma ЕҪwith carcinoma.. Thus, it is tempting to treat a rating of no carcinoma ЕҪa rating of carcinoma. given that the subject falls in latent class 1 ЕҪlatent level 3. as necessarily being a correct judgment. One should realize the tentative nature of the latent variable. Be careful not to make the error of reificationбҺҸtreating an abstract construction as if it has actual existence ЕҪGould 1981..
Using model parameter estimates and BayesвҖҷ theorem, one can also estimate PЕҪ Z s z < Yt s yt . and PЕҪ Z s z < Y1 s y1, . . . , YT s yT .. If a pathologist makes a вҖҳвҖҳ yesвҖҷвҖҷ rating, for instance, what is the estimated probability that the subject is in the latent class for which agreement on a positive rating usually occurs? We perform further analysis in Section 13.2.5 after studying a simpler model.
Espeland and Handelman ЕҪ1989., Uebersax ЕҪ1993., Uebersax and Grove ЕҪ1990, 1993., and Yang and Becker ЕҪ1997. presented various latent variable models for rater agreement and diagnostic accuracy. One could also use methods of Chapters 11 and 12, such as a model with a continuous rather than qualitative latent variable. A logistic-normal random intercept model, for instance, yields subject-specific comparisons of PЕҪYt s 1. for various t.

13.1.3 Latent Class Models for CaptureвҖ“Recapture
We next apply latent class models to captureбҺҗrecapture modeling for estimating population size. In Section 12.3.6 a logistic-normal GLMM was used for this. With T sampling occasions, a 2T contingency table displays the data, with scale ЕҪcaptured, not captured. at each occasion. A prediction of the population size equals the prediction for the missing cell count, representing subjects not captured at every occasion, added to the counts in other cells.
With two classes, the latent class model treats the population as a mixture of two types, perhaps determined by genetic or environmental factors. Homogeneity of capture probabilities occurs for subjects within each type, but the type of any given subject is unknown. This model represents a compromise between the mutual independence model, which assumes a single latent class and complete homogeneity, and the logistic-normal GLMM, which assumes a continuous mixture of capture probabilities rather than two classes.
We illustrate with the T s 6-capture data set on snowshoe hares in Table
12.6. The model of mutual independence predicts that NЛҶ s 75. Its 95%
profile-likelihood confidence interval for N is ЕҪ70, 83.. The latent class model
with two classes has NЛҶ s 85 and a profile-likelihood confidence interval of
ЕҪ74, 106.. The latent class model with three classes gives similar results. Since the logistic-normal GLMM in Section 12.3.6 gave the interval ЕҪ75, 154., these seem too short to be trusted. This simple latent class model may not capture

NONPARAMETRIC RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS

545

all the existing heterogeneity. It is more plausible to assume a continuous latent variable than a discrete one with a couple of classes. WeвҖҷll analyze these data further with related models in the next section.

13.2 NONPARAMETRIC RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS
In spite of its popularity and attractive features, the normality assumption for random effects in ordinary GLMMs can rarely be closely checked. For instance, in studying normal GLMMs, Verbeke and Lesaffre ЕҪ1996. noted that under a normality assumption for random effects, their predicted values often appear normally distributed even when the true values are generated from a highly nonnormal distribution. An obvious concern of this or any parametric assumption for the random effects is possibly harmful effects of misspecification. To check sensitivity to this assumption, one can fit GLMMs using alternative or more general random effects assumptions.
13.2.1 Logit Models with Unspecified Random Effects Distribution
A nonparametric approach ЕҪe.g., Aitkin 1999. guards against possibly harmful misspecification effects. This uses an unspecified random effects distribution on a finite set of mass points. The location of the mass points and their probabilities are parameters. The number of mass points can be fixed. When this number is itself unknown, one treats it as fixed in the estimation process but increases it sequentially until the likelihood is maximized. The maximization usually requires relatively few mass points. Even allowing a continuous mixture distribution, the nonparametric estimate of that distribution takes a finite number of points ЕҪe.g., Lindsay et al. 1991.. In fact, fitting a model having only two mass points often results in fixed effects estimates quite similar to those with the full maximization. This approach is useful primarily when the random effects distribution is not itself of direct interest, since the nonparametric estimate of that distribution tends to be poor even for very large samples.
Model fitting is actually simpler than for models with normal random effects, since the integral that determines the likelihood function simplifies to a finite sum. In Section 13.2.4 we discuss this point with a Rasch-type model. Specialized software can fit nonparametric mixture models ЕҪAppendix A.. However, this approach also has disadvantages. For instance, with multivariate random effects it cannot provide simple correlation structure as the normal can. Standard inference does not apply for comparing models with different numbers of mass points, since one model is on the boundary of the parameter space compared to the other. Also, the ML estimate of the random effects distribution often places some weight at "Пұ. Although this can be useful with binary data for identifying a subsample for which the estimated response probability equals 1 or equals 0 for all observations in a

546

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

cluster, it is not then possible to describe heterogeneity with an estimated

variance component.

To illustrate this approach, we reanalyze Table 10.13 on attitudes about

legalized abortion. In Section 12.3.2 we fitted the logistic-normal model ЕҪ12.10.,

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s ui q вҗӨt q вҗҘ x ,

ЕҪ 13 .3.

with x s gender and parameters Г„ вҗӨt4 representing three conditions under which abortion might be legal. Treating ui instead nonparametrically, the likelihood maximizes with a two-point mixture distribution. Estimated abor-
tion item effects are вҗӨЛҶ1 y вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.83 ЕҪSE s 0.16., вҗӨЛҶ2 y вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.30 ЕҪSE s 0.16., and вҗӨЛҶ1 y вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.52 ЕҪSE s 0.16.. Results are similar to those that
Table 12.3 shows for the normal random effects approach ЕҪSection 12.3.2..

13.2.2 Nonparametric Mixing of Logistic Regression
Follman and Lambert ЕҪ1989. presented an example with a prespecified number of mass points. They analyzed the effect of the dosage of a poison on the probability of death of a protozoan of a particular genus. Table 13.4 shows the data. They assumed two unobserved types of that genus.
Let вҗІiЕҪ x. denote the probability of death at log dose level x for genus type i, i s 1, 2. Let вҗі denote the probability a protozoan belongs to genus type 1. Their model specifies
вҗІ ЕҪ x . s вҗівҗІ 1ЕҪ x . q ЕҪ1 y вҗі . вҗІ 2 ЕҪ x . , where logit вҗІi ЕҪ x . s вҗЈi q вҗӨ x ,
with unknown вҗі. The curve for вҗІ ЕҪ x. is a weighted average of two curves having the same shapes but different intercepts.
The ordinary logistic regression model is the special case вҗі s 1. Its fit,
logitwвҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x.x s y68.4 q 42.1 x ЕҪwith SE s 3.8 for вҗӨЛҶs 42.1., is poor, with
deviance G2 s 24.7 ЕҪdf s 6.. The fit of the mixture model is
вҗІЛҶ ЕҪ x . s 0.34вҗІЛҶ 1ЕҪ x . q 0.66вҗІЛҶ 2 ЕҪ x . ,
with
logit вҗІЛҶ 1ЕҪ x . s y196.2 q 124.8 x, logit вҗІЛҶ 2 ЕҪ x . s y205.7 q 124.8 x,

TABLE 13.4 Number of Protozoa Exposed to Poison Dose and Number That Died

Poison Dose

Exposed

Dead

Poison Dose

Exposed

Dead

4.7

55

0

5.1

53

22

4.8

49

8

5.2

53

37

4.9

60

18

5.3

51

47

5.0

55

18

5.4

50

50

Source: Follman and Lambert ЕҪ1989.. Reprinted with permission from the Journal of the American Statistical Association.

NONPARAMETRIC RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS

547

FIGURE 13.2 Fit of binary mixture of logistic regressions to Table 13.4 wmodel fitted using Latent Gold ЕҪStatistical Innovations, Belmont, MA.x.
and SE s 25.2 for вҗӨЛҶs 124.8. Figure 13.2 shows the fit. This is much better,
with G2 s 3.4 ЕҪdf s 4.; that is, double the maximized log-likelihood increases by 24.7 y 3.4 s 21.3 by adding two parameters: an additional intercept and the probability for the mixture. Follman and Lambert noted that with eight dose levels, at most two mixture points are identifiable for this model.
The ordinary GLMM assumes a normal mixture of logistic curves. It gives a deviance reduction of only 1.7 compared to the ordinary logistic model with вҗі s 1.
13.2.3 Is Misspecification a Serious Problem?
Is it worth the trouble to consider alternatives to the normality assumption for random effects in GLMMs, whether they be parametric or nonparametric? Not much work exists on investigating misspecification effects. For logistic random intercept models, different assumptions for the random effects distribution often provide similar results for estimating the regression effects. Choosing an incorrect random effects distribution does not tend to bias estimators of those effects. The true distribution for the random effects being skewed can result in some bias for the normal intercept estimator ЕҪNeuhaus et al. 1992.. The choice of random effects distribution also usually has little impact on efficiency of estimation.
When the true random effects distribution is dramatically far from normal, there can be some efficiency loss for the logistic-normal estimator. This can

548

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

happen when the true distribution is a two-point mixture with large variance component. B. Caffo and I studied this with various models, such as a simple one-way random effects model. In cluster i, let yit be a Bernoulli variate satisfying
logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s вҗЈ q ui , i s 1, . . . , n, t s 1, . . . , T , ЕҪ13.4.
where varЕҪui. s вҗҙ 2. Simulated samples from this model used various n, T, вҗЈ , and вҗҙ , and various true distributions for ui including normal, uniform, exponential, and binary. Usually, assuming normality does not hurt when the true distribution is nonnormal. Also, using a nonparametric approach when the true distribution is normal does not result in much efficiency loss wNeuhaus and Lesperance ЕҪ1996. noted this for a related model.x However, when the true distribution is a two-point mixture, the normal approach loses efficiency in estimating Г„вҗ®i s PЕҪYit s 1 < ui.4 as вҗҙ and T increase. For example, when n s T s 30, вҗЈ s 0, and the mixture has probability 0.5 at
each point, the expected value of вҗ®ЛҶi y вҗ®i is ЕҪ0.06, 0.05. for the
ЕҪnormal, nonparametric. approach when вҗҙ s 0.5, ЕҪ0.06, 0.02. when вҗҙ s 1.0, and ЕҪ0.04, 0.01. when вҗҙ s 2.0. Differences for estimating вҗЈ are less dramatic.
The example from Follman and Lambert ЕҪ1989. discussed in Section 13.2.2, which has a covariate but T s 1, illustrates the potential efficiency loss with the logistic-normal GLMM. The two-point mixture model has
вҗӨЛҶs 124.8 with SE s 25.2, for which вҗӨЛҶrSE s 4.9. The normal mixture model has вҗӨЛҶs 65.5 with SE s 19.5, for which вҗӨЛҶrSE s 3.4.
Our study suggested that the random effects distribution has to be rather extremely nonnormal for the normal GLMM to suffer in bias or efficiency. However, Heagerty and Zeger ЕҪ2000. ЕҪsee also McCulloch 1997. noted that other types of misspecification can be more crucial. Regarding bias, they argued that sensitivity to the random effects assumption is greater for estimating regression parameters in random effects models than estimating their counterparts in corresponding marginal models. They illustrated this with a model violation by which the variance of the random effects depends on values of covariates. They concluded that between-cluster effects may be more sensitive to correct specification of the random effects distribution than within-cluster effects. This is an advantage of using marginal models for between-cluster effects.

13.2.4 Rasch Mixture Model
From Section 12.1.4, for subject i with item t the Rasch model for a binary response is

logit P ЕҪ Yit s 1 < ui . s ui q вҗӨt , t s 1, . . . , T .

ЕҪ 13 .5.

NONPARAMETRIC RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS

549

The GLMM treats Г„ui4 as normal random effects. Lindsay et al. ЕҪ1991. studied this model when ui instead can assume only a finite number q of values. Denote the distribution of the latent variable ui, which is the same for all i, by
PЕҪU s ak . s вҗіk , k s 1, . . . , q,

for unknown Г„ak4 and Г„ вҗіk4. For identifiability one can either place a constraint on this distribution, such as Гқk вҗіk ak s 0, or on Г„ вҗӨt4. This model is called a Rasch mixture model.
Like other random effects models, the Rasch mixture model is a latent
variable model. The random effect ui is unobserved, and the T responses are assumed conditionally independent at each fixed ui value. It differs from the ordinary latent class model for binary responses having q latent classes ЕҪSection 13.1., since it assumes structure ЕҪ13.5. for PЕҪYit s 1 < ui. whereas latent class model ЕҪ13.1. assumes no structure for PЕҪYt s yt < Z s z..
This model is simpler to fit than GLMMs with normal random effects
because the GLMMвҖҷs intractable integral that determines the likelihood
function is replaced by a finite sum. The marginal probability of a sequence of responses ЕҪ y1, . . . , yT . is

q

T exp yt ЕҪ ak q вҗӨt .

вҗІy1, . . . , yT s Гқ вҗіk ЕҒ

.

ks1 ts1 1 q expЕҪ ak q вҗӨt .

Substituting this in the multinomial log likelihood ЕҪ13.2., ML estimation of Г„ak , вҗіk4 and Г„ вҗӨt4 can proceed using NewtonбҺҗRaphson or EM algorithms. As q increases, the maximized likelihood increases and the fit improves. However, Lindsay et al. ЕҪ1991. showed that with T items, the likelihood no longer changes once q s ЕҪT q 1.r2. Then, the model gives the same fit to the 2T observed table as the quasi-symmetry model ЕҪ10.33.. Thus, this simpler latent
class model has a symmetric conditional association structure among the observed variables. Arminger et al. ЕҪ2000. extended the Rasch mixture model
to incorporate covariates.

13.2.5 Modeling Rater Agreement
For the ratings of carcinoma by seven pathologists ЕҪTable 13.1., Table 13.2 also summarizes the fit of Rasch mixture models. Here, PЕҪYit s 1 < ui. in ЕҪ13.5. denotes the probability of a carcinoma diagnosis for pathologist t evaluating slide i. With q s 3 ЕҪi.e., ui can take 3 values., it does not fit significantly more poorly than the latent class model. With T s 7 raters, the discrete mixture can take at most ЕҪT q 1.r2 s 4 points. The model with q s 4 is equivalently the quasi-symmetry model. It does not seem to fit better than with q s 3.

550

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

FIGURE 13.3 Pathologist estimates for Rasch mixture model and results of 90% Bonferroni simultaneous comparison.
Figure 13.3 shows Г„ вҗӨЛҶt4 for the Rasch mixture model with q s 3, setting Гқt вҗӨЛҶt s 0. These describe variation among the pathologistsвҖҷ response distribu-
tions at each latent level. For a given latent class, for instance, the estimated odds of a carcinoma diagnosis for pathologist B are expЕҪ3.52 y 1.48. s 7.7 times the estimated odds for pathologist A. Pathologist B tends to make a carcinoma diagnosis most often, and D and F the least. The figure also shows results of a 90% Bonferroni comparison of the 21 pairs of pathologists, based
on standard errors of pairwise differences вҗӨЛҶt y вҗӨЛҶs.
For pathologist t, conditional on latent level k for a slide,
expЕҪ aЛҶk q вҗӨЛҶt . 1 q expЕҪ aЛҶk q вҗӨЛҶt .
estimates the probability of a carcinoma diagnosis. Table 13.3 reports these,
which use aЛҶ1 s y5.25, aЛҶ2 s y1.02, and aЛҶ3 s 3.63. They are similar to the
estimates for the ordinary latent class model but a bit smoother, with fewer estimates at the boundary. Again, at latent level 1 pathologists tend not to diagnose carcinoma, at level 2 many disagreements occur, and at level 3 pathologists tend to diagnose carcinoma. The estimated latent class propor-
tions are вҗіЛҶ1 s 0.37, вҗіЛҶ2 s 0.19, and вҗіЛҶ3 s 0.43, with 19% of cases falling in
the problematic class. Model ЕҪ13.5. implies that the association between each Yt and U has log
odds ratio ЕҪ ak y a l . for levels k and l of U. For instance, in the third latent
class the estimated odds that a pathologist diagnoses carcinoma are exp w3.63 y ЕҪy5.25.x ) 7000 times those in the first latent class. In terms of the estimated probabilities in Table 13.3, using pathologist A this is
exp wЕҪ0.994r0.006.rЕҪ0.022r0.978.x. The large Г„aЛҶk y aЛҶl 4 suggest strong associa-
tion between each pathologistвҖҷs rating and the latent variable. This induces strong association between pairs of pathologist ratings. ЕҪThe model-fitted odds ratios between pairs of raters vary between about 7 and 400.. However,
the quite varied Г„ вҗӨЛҶt4 suggest that substantial marginal heterogeneity exists
among the seven ratings. This causes heterogeneity in pairwise levels of agreement.
The mutual independence model is the special case of the Rasch mixture model with q s 1; that is, вҗі1 s 1. For Table 13.1 the Rasch mixture model with q s 3 has only four more parameters than the mutual independence

NONPARAMETRIC RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS

551

model ЕҪi.e., вҗіk and ak , k s 1,2.. Yet it fits well and has simple interpretations. See Agresti and Lang ЕҪ1993b. for further details and a simpler model that sets a1 y a2 s a2 y a3.

13.2.6 Other Models for CaptureвҖ“Recapture
In Section 13.1.3 latent-class models were used for captureбҺҗrecapture experiments. Alternatively, one could use the Rasch mixture model. Model ЕҪ13.5.
with two classes gives NЛҶ s 77 and a 95% profile-likelihood confidence
interval of ЕҪ71, 87.. This seems too short to trust. It is more realistic to allow a continuous distribution for capture probabilities. Model ЕҪ13.5. treating ui as normal rather than binary does this, and in Section 12.3.6 we used it for these data.
So, which models might be used other than a parametric random effects model? One possibility is a loglinear model ЕҪCormack 1989.. This is a marginal model, applying to probabilities averaged over subjects. Let Yt denote the binary capture variable for a randomly selected subject at occasion t, with categories ЕҪcaptured, not captured.. The simplest model, denoted by ЕҪY1, Y2 , . . . , YT ., assumes that capture events are mutually independent. This is equivalent to the logistic-normal model ЕҪ13.5. with вҗҙ s 0 and latent class model ЕҪ13.1. with q s 1. A more plausible model allows an association between pairs of capture variables. This is equivalently the loglinear model denoted ЕҪY1Y2 , Y1Y3, . . . , YTy1 YT .. Alternatively, a model with Markov structure such as ЕҪY1Y2 , Y2Y3, . . . , YTy1 YT . may be useful. Usually, insufficient data exists to warrant using very complex loglinear models. For any such model, its fit for the 2T y 1 observed cells projects to the remaining cell to predict the number unobserved at every occasion.
A connection exists between nonparametric random effects and loglinear approaches. In Section 13.2.7 we show that assuming model ЕҪ13.5. but using a nonparametric treatment of ui implies a loglinear model of quasi-symmetric form for the marginal model. The quasi-symmetry model ЕҪ10.33. itself is not useful for this problem, because any count in the missing cell is consistent with it. The model has an interaction parameter pertaining to that cell alone, which results in a likelihood equation equating that cell count to its fitted value. So, information in other cells does not help in the estimation of the expected frequency in that cell. However, special cases of quasi-symmetry are useful ЕҪDarroch et al. 1993.. An example is the loglinear model with the same association for each pair of occasions. Like the logistic-normal model, this model of exchangeable association has only one more parameter than the mutual independence model.
For the snowshoe hare data of Table 12.6, the model with exchangeable
two-factor association has NЛҶ s 90.5 and a confidence interval of ЕҪ75, 125..
This interval and the one of ЕҪ71, 87. for the Rasch mixture model with q s 2 are substantially narrower than the interval ЕҪ75, 154. for the logistic-normal
model ЕҪSection 12.3.6.. In captureбҺҗrecapture experiments, NЛҶ and the confi-

552

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

dence interval for N depend strongly on the choice of model. The problem is inherently one of prediction. Estimating N requires extrapolating from the observed numbers of subjects having 1, 2, . . . , T captures to the number of subjects with 0 captures. Standard goodness-of-fit criteria are of limited help. Two models can fit the data well, yet yield quite different estimates for the unobserved count. For instance, for the snowshoe hare data, the loglinear models of mutual independence and of two-factor association both fit the observed cells relatively well ЕҪG2 s 58.3, df s 56 for mutual independence
and G2 s 32.4, df s 41 for the two-factor model.; however, their NЛҶ values
are 75 and 105. Simpler models usually give narrower confidence intervals for N, through
the usual benefits of model parsimony. This is not necessarily good. A narrow confidence interval for N is desirable, but not at the expense of severe sacrifice in the actual confidence level. Intervals based on a possibly unrealistic assumption of subject homogeneity may be overly optimistic. Simulations suggest that actual coverage probabilities are often well below nominal levels when even slight model misspecification occurs. Allowance for heterogeneity among subjects results in wider intervals. Severe population heterogeneity makes reaching useful conclusions difficult, as intervals can be very wide ЕҪBurnham and Overton 1978, Coull and Agresti 1999..

13.2.7 Nonparametric Mixtures and Quasi-symmetry
A distribution-free approach for ui with the Rasch form of model ЕҪ13.5. implies the quasi-symmetry loglinear model marginally ЕҪDarroch 1981; Tjur 1982.. We now show this result, to which we alluded in Section 10.4.2.
Let Yi denote the sequence of T responses for subject i. For possible outcomes y s ЕҪ y1, . . . , yT ., where each yt s 1 or 0,

expЕҪ ui q вҗӨt . yt
P ЕҪYi s y < ui . s ЕҒ

1 1yy t

t 1 q expЕҪ ui q вҗӨt .

1 q expЕҪ ui q вҗӨt .

exp ui ЕҪГқt yt . q Гқt yt вҗӨt s ЕҒ t 1 q expЕҪ ui q вҗӨt . .

Let F denote the cdf of ui. The marginal probability of sequence y for a randomly selected subject is ЕҪsuppressing the subject label.

Еҫ / вҗІy1, . . . , yT s EU P ЕҪY s y < U . s exp Гқ yt вҗӨt H exp uЕҪГқt yt .

dF ЕҪ u. .

t

ЕҒ t 1 q expЕҪ u q вҗӨt .

This probability contributes to the log likelihood, which is ЕҪ13.2. for a multinomial distribution over the 2T cells for possible y. Regardless of the
choice for F, the integral is complex. However, it depends on the data only

BETA-BINOMIAL MODELS

553

through Гқt yt. A more general model replaces this integral by a separate parameter for each value of Гқt yt. This model has form

logвҗІy1 , . . . , yT s Гқ yt вҗӨt q вҗӯ y1q РёРёРё qy t .
t

ЕҪ 13 .6.

The final term represents a separate parameter at each value of Гқt yt. The implied marginal model ЕҪ13.6. has interaction term that is invariant to
a permutation of the response outcomes y, since each such permutation yields the same sum, Гқt yt. Thus, it is the loglinear model of quasi-symmetry ЕҪ10.33.. No matter what form F takes, the marginal model has the same main
effect structure, and it has an interaction term that is a special case of the one in ЕҪ13.6.. Thus, one can consistently estimate Г„ вҗӨt4 using the ordinary ML estimates for the loglinear model. In fact, Tjur ЕҪ1982. showed that these estimates are also the conditional ML estimates, treating Г„ui4 as fixed effects and conditioning on their sufficient statistics. The interaction parameters in model ЕҪ13.6. result from the dependence in responses among variables, due to heterogeneity in Г„ui4.
We illustrate for the opinions about legalized abortion analyzed in
Sections 10.7.2 and 12.3.2 and with a nonparametric random effects approach in Section 13.2.1. For model ЕҪ13.3., estimated within-subject comparisons вҗӨt y вҗӨs of items result from fitting a quasi-symmetric loglinear model. Let вҗ®gЕҪ y1, y2 , y3. denote the expected frequency for gender g making response yt to item t, t s 1, 2, 3, where for item t, yt s 1 for approval of legalized abortion and 0 for disapproval. The loglinear model is

log вҗ®g ЕҪ y1 , y2 , y3 . s вҗӨ1 y1 q вҗӨ2 y2 q вҗӨ3 y3 q вҗҘ g q вҗӯ y1qy 2qy 3 . ЕҪ 13.7.

For y1 q y2 q y3 s k, вҗӯk refers to all cells in which subjects voiced approval for k of the three items, k s 0, 1, 2, 3. The ML fit, which has
G2 s 10.2 with df s 9, yields вҗӨЛҶ1 y вҗӨЛҶ2 s 0.521 ЕҪSE s 0.154., вҗӨЛҶ1 y вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.828 ЕҪSE s 0.160., and вҗӨЛҶ2 y вҗӨЛҶ3 s 0.307 ЕҪSE s 0.161.. These are similar to the
normal random effects estimates ЕҪTable 12.3. and nonparametric random
effects estimates in Section 13.2.1. They also are the conditional ML estimates for model ЕҪ13.3., treating Г„ui4 as fixed. With this approach or conditional ML, however, one cannot estimate between-groups effects, such as the gender effect in model ЕҪ13.7.. wThe вҗҘ parameter in model ЕҪ13.7. refers to
relative sample sizes of males and females and is not the same as the gender effect in ЕҪ13.3..x

13.3 BETA-BINOMIAL MODELS
The beta-binomial model is a parametric mixture model that is another alternative to binary GLMMs with normal random effects. As with other

554

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

mixture models that assume a binomial distribution at a fixed parameter value, the marginal distribution permits more variation than the binomial. Thus, a model using the beta-binomial is a way to handle overdispersion occurring with ordinary binomial models.

13.3.1 Beta-Binomial Distribution The beta-binomial distribution results from a beta distribution mixture of binomials. Suppose that ЕҪa. given вҗІ , Y has a binomial distribution, binЕҪ n, вҗІ ., and ЕҪb. вҗІ has a beta distribution.
The beta probability density function is
f ЕҪвҗІ ; вҗЈ , вҗӨ . s вҢ« ЕҪвҗЈ вҢ«ЕҪвҗЈ. вҢ«ЕҪ вҗӨ . вҗІ q вҗӨ . вҗЈy1 ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . вҗӨy1 , 0 F вҗІ F 1, ЕҪ13.8.
with parameters вҗЈ ) 0 and вҗӨ ) 0, for the gamma function вҢ«ЕҪРё.. Let
вҗ® s вҗЈ , вҗӘ s 1rЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ . .
вҗЈqвҗӨ

The beta distribution for вҗІ has mean and variance
EЕҪвҗІ . s вҗ®, varЕҪвҗІ . s вҗ®ЕҪ1 y вҗ®. вҗӘrЕҪ1 q вҗӘ . .

When вҗЈ and вҗӨ exceed 1.0, the distribution is unimodal, with skew to the right when вҗЈ - вҗӨ, skew to the left with вҗЈ ) вҗӨ, and symmetry when вҗЈ s вҗӨ. It simplifies to the uniform distribution when вҗЈ s вҗӨ s 1.
Marginally, averaging with respect to the beta distribution for вҗІ , Y has the beta-binomial distribution. Its mass function is
Еҫ / pЕҪ y ; вҗЈ , вҗӨ . s n BЕҪвҗЈ y BЕҪвҗЈ, вҗӨ . , q y, n q вҗӨ y y. y s 0, 1, . . . , n.

In terms of вҗ® and вҗӘ , the beta-binomial mass function is

Еҫ / pЕҪ y; вҗ®, вҗӘ . s ny

ЕҒ kysy01 ЕҪ вҗ® q kвҗӘ . ЕҒ knsy0yy1 ЕҪ 1 y вҗ® q kвҗӘ . . ЕҪ 13.9.

ЕҒ

ny1 ks0

ЕҪ

1

q

kвҗӘ

.

It is easier to understand the nature of this distribution from its moments than from its mass function. The first two moments are
EЕҪ Y . s nвҗ®, varЕҪ Y . s nвҗ®ЕҪ1 y вҗ®. 1 q ЕҪ n y 1. вҗӘrЕҪ1 q вҗӘ . .

BETA-BINOMIAL MODELS

555

As вҗӘ в„ў 0 in the beta distribution, varЕҪвҗІ . в„ў 0 and that distribution converges to a degenerate distribution at вҗ®. Then varЕҪY . в„ў nвҗ®ЕҪ1 y вҗ®. and the betabinomial distribution converges to the binЕҪ n, вҗ®..

13.3.2 Models Using the Beta-Binomial Distribution Models using the beta-binomial distribution permit вҗ® wand hence EЕҪY .x to depend on explanatory variables. The simplest models let вҗӘ be the same unknown constant for all observations. wPrentice ЕҪ1986. considered extensions where it could also depend on covariates.x Like GLMs, models can use various link functions, but the logit is most common. For observation i with ni trials, assuming that yi has a beta-binomial distribution with index ni and parameters ЕҪвҗ®i, вҗӘ ., the model links вҗ®i to predictors by
X
logitЕҪ вҗ®i . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ x i .

The beta-binomial is not in the natural exponential family, even for known вҗӘ. Articles using beta-binomial models have employed a variety of fitting methods ЕҪNote 13.4.. Crowder ЕҪ1978. discussed the likelihood behavior for an
ANOVA-type model. Hinde and DemВҙetrio ЕҪ1998. obtained the ML fit by
iterating between solving the likelihood equations for the regression parameters вҗӨ, for fixed вҗӘ , and solving the likelihood equation for вҗӘ for fixed вҗӨ. Each part can use NewtonбҺҗRaphson. McCulloch and Searle ЕҪ2001, p. 61.
showed the asymptotic covariance matrix of ЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ, вҗӘЛҶ. and of ЕҪвҗЈЛҶ, вҗӨЛҶ. for
independent observations from a single beta-binomial distribution.
A related but simpler approach for overdispersed binary counts uses
quasi-likelihood with similar variance function as the beta-binomial. The
quasi-likelihood variance function is

В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . s ni вҗ®i ЕҪ1 y вҗ®i . 1 q ЕҪ ni y 1. вҗі

ЕҪ 13 .10.

with < вҗі < F 1. Although motivated by the beta-binomial model, this variance function results merely from assuming that вҗІi has a distribution with varЕҪвҗІi. s вҗівҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i.. It also results from assuming a common correlation вҗі between each pair of the ni individual binary random variables that sum to yi ЕҪAltham 1978.. The ordinary binomial variance results when вҗі s 0. Overdispersion occurs when вҗі ) 0.
For this quasi-likelihood approach, Williams ЕҪ1982. gave an iterative
routine for estimating вҗӨ and the overdispersion parameter вҗі. He let вҗіЛҶ be
such that the resulting Pearson X 2 that sums the squared Pearson residuals
for this variance function equals the residual df for the model. This requires an iterative two-step process of ЕҪ1. solving the quasi-likelihood equations for
вҗӨ for a given вҗіЛҶ, and then ЕҪ2. using the updated вҗӨЛҶ, solving for вҗіЛҶ in the equation that equates X 2 ЕҪwhich depends on вҗӨЛҶ and вҗіЛҶ. to its df.

556

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

An alternative quasi-likelihood approach uses the simpler variance function

В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . s вҗҫ ni вҗ®i ЕҪ1 y вҗ®i .

ЕҪ 13 .11.

introduced in Section 4.7.3. The ordinary binomial variance has вҗҫ s 1.0 and
overdispersion has вҗҫ ) 1. With this approach, вҗӨЛҶ is the same as its ML estimate for the ordinary binomial model. Commonly, вҗҫЛҶ s X 2rdf, where X 2
is the Pearson fit statistic for the binomial model ЕҪFinney 1947.. The standard
errors for the overdispersion approach multiply those for the binomial model
by вҗҫЛҶ1r2 .
Liang and McCullagh ЕҪ1993. showed several examples using these two
variance functions. A plot of the standardized residuals for the ordinary binomial model against the indices Г„ni4 can provide insight about which is more appropriate. When the residuals show an increasing trend in their
spread as ni increases, the beta-binomial-type variance function may be more appropriate. This is because when the beta-binomial variance holds,
the residuals from an ordinary binomial model have denominator that is
progressively too small as ni increases. The two quasi-likelihood approaches are equivalent when Г„ni4 are identical. Only when the indices vary considerably might results differ much. Because the variance function В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫ ni вҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i. has a structural problem when ni s 1 ЕҪProblem 13.33. and has less direct motivation, we prefer quasi-likelihood with the beta-binomial
variance function.

13.3.3 Teratology Overdispersion Example Revisited
Refer back to Table 4.5 on results of a teratology experiment analyzed by Liang and McCullagh ЕҪ1993. and Moore and Tsiatis ЕҪ1991.. Female rats on iron-deficient diets were assigned to four groups. Group 1 was given only placebo injections. The other groups were given injections of an iron supplement according to various schedules. The rats were made pregnant and then sacrificed after 3 weeks. For each fetus in each ratвҖҷs litter, the response was whether the fetus was dead. Because of unmeasured covariates, it is natural to permit the probability of death to vary from litter to litter within a particular treatment group.
Let yi denote the number dead out of the ni fetuses in litter i. Let вҗІit denote the probability of death for fetus t in litter i. First, suppose that yi is a bin ЕҪ ni,вҗІ it . variate, with
logitЕҪ вҗІ it . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ2 z2 i q вҗӨ3 z3i q вҗӨ4 z4 i ,
where zg i s 1 if litter i is in group g and 0 otherwise. This model treats all litters in a group g as having the same probability of death, expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨg .r w1 q expЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨg .x, where вҗӨ1 s 0. However, it has evidence of overdispersion,

BETA-BINOMIAL MODELS

557

TABLE 13.5 Estimates for Several Logit Models Fitted to Table 4.5

Parameter

Binomial ML

QLЕҪ1.

Type of Logit Modela QLЕҪ2.

GEE

GLMM

Intercept Group 2 Group 3 Group 4

1.144 ЕҪ0.129. y3.322 ЕҪ0.331. y4.476 ЕҪ0.731. y4.130 ЕҪ0.476.

1.212 ЕҪ0.223. y3.370 ЕҪ0.563. y4.585 ЕҪ1.303. y4.250 ЕҪ0.848.

1.144 ЕҪ0.219. y3.322 ЕҪ0.560. y4.476 ЕҪ1.238. y4.130 ЕҪ0.806.

1.144 ЕҪ0.276. y3.322 ЕҪ0.440. y4.476 ЕҪ0.610. y4.130 ЕҪ0.576.

1.802 ЕҪ0.362. y4.515 ЕҪ0.736. y5.855 ЕҪ1.190. y5.594 ЕҪ0.919.

Overdispersion

None

вҗіЛҶ s 0.192

вҗҫЛҶ s 2.86

вҗіЛҶ s 0.185

вҗҙЛҶ s 1.53

aBinomial ML assumes no overdispersion, QLЕҪ1. is quasi-likelihood with beta-binomial-type variance, QLЕҪ2. is quasi-likelihood with inflated binomial variance; QLЕҪ2. and GEE ЕҪindependence working equations. estimates are the same as binomial ML estimates. Values in parentheses are standard errors.

with X 2 s 154.7 and G2 s 173.5 ЕҪdf s 54.. Table 13.5 shows ML estimates and standard errors.
Table 13.5 also shows results for the two quasi-likelihood approaches. Estimates and standard errors are qualitatively similar for each. For variance function В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫ ni вҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i., the estimates equal the binomial ML
estimates but standard errors are multiplied by вҗҫЛҶ1r2 s ЕҪ X 2rdf.1r2 s
'154.7r54 s 1.69. For the beta-binomial-type variance function, вҗіЛҶ s 0.192.
This fit treats the variance of Yi as
ni вҗ®i ЕҪ1 y вҗ®i . 1 q 0.192ЕҪ ni y 1. .
This corresponds roughly to a doubling of the variance relative to the binomial with a litter size of 6 and a tripling with ni s 11. Even with these adjustments for overdispersion, Table 13.5 shows that strong evidence remains that the probability of death is substantially lower for each treatment group than the placebo group.
Figure 13.4 plots the standardized Pearson residuals against litter size for the binomial logit model. The apparent increase in their variability as litter size increases suggests that the beta-binomial variance function is plausible. The term вҗі in that variance function corresponds to вҗӘrЕҪ1 q вҗӘ . in the variance of the beta-binomial distribution. For that distribution or more
generally, вҗіЛҶ s 0.192 means that the probabilities of death for litters of a
particular group have estimated standard deviation '0.192 вҗ®i ЕҪ1 y вҗ®i . . This
equals 0.22 when the mean is 0.5 and 0.13 when the mean is 0.1 or 0.9, which is considerable heterogeneity. More generally, a model could let вҗі vary by treatment group or be different for the placebo group than the others. We leave this to the reader.
For comparison, Table 13.5 also shows results with the GEE approach to fitting the logit model, assuming an independence working correlation structure for observations within a litter. The estimates are the same as the ML

558

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

FIGURE 13.4 Standardized Pearson residuals for binomial logit model fitted to Table 4.5.
estimates for the binomial logit model, but the empirical adjustment increases the standard errors. Similar results occur with an exchangeable working correlation structure. For it, the estimated within-litter correlation between the binary responses is 0.185. This is comparable to the value of 0.192 that yields the quasi-likelihood results with beta-binomial variance function. The GEE standard errors are somewhat different from those with the quasi-likelihood approach. It may be that the sample size is insufficient for the GEE sandwich adjustment, which tends to underestimate standard errors unless the number of clusters is quite large. Or, this may simply reflect the different variance function for the GEE approach.
Finally, Table 13.5 also shows results for the GLMM that adds a normal random intercept ui for litter i to the binomial logit model. Results are also similar in terms of significance of the treatment groups relative to placebo. Estimated effects are larger for this logistic-normal model, since they are subject-specific ЕҪi.e., litter-specific. rather than population-averaged.
13.3.4 Conjugate Mixture Models
The beta-binomial model is an example of a conjugate mixture model. These are models for which the marginal distribution has closed form. The data have a particular distribution, conditional on a parameter, and then the parameter has its own distribution such that the marginal distribution has closed form.

NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REFRESSION

559

Similarly, in Bayesian methods the conjugate prior distribution is a distribution that when combined with the likelihood, gives a closed form for the posterior distribution. For instance, for observations from a binomial distribution with beta prior distribution for the binomial parameter, the posterior distribution of that parameter is also beta. Conjugate models were the primary method of conducting Bayesian analysis before the development of computationally intensive methods, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo, for evaluating the integral that determines the posterior distribution.
The beta-binomial conjugate mixture model applies with totals from binary trials. In the next section we study a conjugate mixture model for count data. It uses a gamma distribution to mix the Poisson parameter. A disadvantage of the conjugate mixture approach is the lack of generality and flexibility, requiring a different mixture distribution for each type of problem. In addition, the extra variability need not enter on the same scale as the ordinary predictors, and it can be difficult to have multivariate random effects structure. Lee and Nelder ЕҪ1996. discussed this approach and considered a variety of hierarchical models of GLMM form in which the random effect need not be normal.

13.4 NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSION
The negative binomial is a conjugate mixture distribution for count data. It is useful when overdispersion occurs with Poisson GLMs.

13.4.1 Negative Binomial as Gamma Mixture of Poisson Distributions

In Section 4.3.3 we noted that a severe limitation of Poisson models is that the variance of Y must equal the mean. Hence, at a fixed mean the variance cannot decrease as additional predictors enter the model. Count data often show overdispersion, with the variance exceeding the mean. This might happen, for instance, because some relevant explanatory variables are not in the model. A mixture model is a flexible way to account for overdispersion. At a fixed setting of the predictors used, given the mean the distribution of Y is Poisson, but the mean itself varies according to some distribution.
Suppose that ЕҪ1. given вҗӯ, Y has a Poisson distribution with mean вҗӯ, and ЕҪ2. вҗӯ has a gamma distribution, GЕҪ k, вҗ®.. The gamma probability density function for вҗӯ is

f ЕҪ вҗӯ; k , вҗ®. ЕҪ krвҗ®. s expЕҪykвҗӯrвҗ®. вҗӯky1 k , вҢ«ЕҪ k.

вҗӯ G 0.

ЕҪ 13 .12.

This gamma distribution has
EЕҪ вҗӯ. s вҗ®,

varЕҪ вҗӯ. s вҗ®2rk .

560

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

The parameter k ) 0 describes the shape. The density is skewed to the right, but the degree of skewness decreases as k increases.
Marginally, the gamma mixture of the Poisson distributions yields the negative binomial distribution for Y. Its probability mass function is

Еҫ / Еҫ / pЕҪ y; k, вҗ®. s вҢ«ЕҪ y q k. вҢ«ЕҪ k. вҢ«ЕҪ y q 1.

kk

ky

вҗ®qk 1y вҗ®qk ,

y s 0, 1, 2, . . . .
ЕҪ 13 .13.

This negative binomial distribution has
EЕҪ Y . s вҗ®, varЕҪ Y . s вҗ® q вҗ®2rk .
The index ky1 is called the dispersion parameter. As ky1 в„ў 0, the gamma distribution has varЕҪ вҗӯ. в„ў 0 and it converges to a degenerate distribution at вҗ®; similarly, the negative binomial distribution then has varЕҪY . в„ў вҗ® and it converges to the Poisson distribution with mean вҗ®.
For given ky1, the negative binomial is in the natural exponential family. The natural parameter is logw вҗ®rЕҪвҗ® q k.x. Usually, though, the dispersion parameter ky1 is itself unknown. Estimating it helps to summarize the extent of overdispersion. The greater ky1, the greater the overdispersion compared to the ordinary Poisson GLM. For independent observations, the ML estimate of вҗ® is the sample mean, but ML estimation for ky1 requires iterative methods ЕҪR. A. Fisher showed this in an appendix of a 1953 Biometrics article by C. Bliss.. Problem 13.40 shows an alternative gamma parameterization that implies a linear rather than quadratic variance function for the negative binomial.

13.4.2 Negative Binomial Regression Modeling
Negative binomial models for counts permit вҗ® to depend on explanatory variables ЕҪLawless 1987.. Such models normally take ky1 to be the same for all observations. This corresponds to a constant coefficient of variation in the
gamma mixing distribution, 'varЕҪ вҗӯ. rEЕҪ вҗӯ. s 1r'k . with the standard devi-
ation increasing as the mean does. Most common is the log link, as in Poisson loglinear models. Sometimes the identity link is adequate. One such case is with a single predictor that is a factor.
For k fixed, a negative binomial model is a GLM. Thus, the likelihood equations for the regression parameters вҗӨ are special cases of those wsee ЕҪ4.22.x for an ordinary GLM with variance function В®ЕҪвҗ®. s вҗ® q вҗ®2rk. The usual iterative reweighted least squares algorithm applies for ML model fitting. When k is unknown, ML fitting can use a NewtonбҺҗRaphson routine on all the parameters simultaneously. Or, one can evaluate the profile likelihood for various fixed k ЕҪLawless 1987.. Another approach alternates

NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REFRESSION

561

between ЕҪ1. using iterative reweighted least squares to solve the equations for
вҗӨ, for fixed k, and ЕҪ2. for fixed вҗӨЛҶ, using NewtonбҺҗRaphson to estimate k,
iterating between them until convergence. The full log likelihood LЕҪвҗӨ, k; y. for a negative binomial model satisfies

s СЁ 2L Гқ

yi y вҗ®i

2X

xit .

СЁвҗӨj СЁ k i ЕҪ k q вҗ®i . g ЕҪ вҗ®i .

Thus, EЕҪСЁ 2LrСЁвҗӨjСЁ k. s 0 for each j. Similarly, the inverse of the expected information matrix has 0 elements connecting k with each вҗӨj. Since this is
the asymptotic covariance matrix, вҗӨЛҶ and ЛҶk are asymptotically independent. It follows that standard errors for вҗӨЛҶ obtained from part ЕҪ1. of the iterative
scheme above are correct. Cameron and Trivedi ЕҪ1998, p. 72. showed the asymptotic covariance matrix. They wand Lawless ЕҪ1987.x considered a moment estimator for ky1 and studied robustness properties of estimators.
They noted that вҗӨЛҶ from this model is consistent if the model for the mean is
correctly specified, even if the true distribution is not negative binomial.

13.4.3 Frequency of Knowing Homicide Victims Example
Table 13.6 summarizes responses of 1308 subjects to the question: Within the past 12 months, how many people have you known personally that were victims of homicide? The table shows responses by race, for those who identified their race as white or as black. The sample mean for the 159 blacks was 0.522, with a variance of 1.150. The sample mean for the 1149 whites was 0.092, with a variance of 0.155.
A natural first choice for modeling count data is a Poisson GLM, such as a loglinear model with a dummy predictor for race. Let yit denote the response for subject t of race i. For вҗ®it s EЕҪYit ., this model is
log вҗ®it s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xit ,

TABLE 13.6 Number of Victims of Murder Known in Past Year, by Race, with Fit of Poisson and Negative Binomial Models

Data

Poisson GLM Neg. Bin. GLM Poisson GLMM

Response Black White Black White Black White Black White

0

119 1070 94.3 1047.7 122.8 1064.9 116.7 1068.3

1

16

60 49.2

96.7 17.9

67.5 24.5

65.3

2

12

14 12.9

4.5

7.8

12.7

8.1

10.1

3

7

4

2.2

0.1

4.1

2.9

3.6

2.8

4

3

0

0.3

0.0

2.4

0.7

1.9

1.1

5

2

0

0.0

0.0

1.4

0.2

1.1

0.5

6

0

1

0.0

0.0

0.9

0.1

0.7

0.3

Source: 1990 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

562

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

with x1t s 1 ЕҪblacks. and x2 t s 0 ЕҪwhites.. This model has fit log вҗ®ЛҶit s y2.38
q 1.733 xit. The estimated expected responses are expЕҪy2.38 q 1.733. s 0.522 for blacks and expЕҪy2.38. s 0.092 for whites, the sample means. For any link function for this model, the likelihood equations imply that the fitted
means equal the sample means. Since вҗӨЛҶs 1.733 ЕҪSE s 0.147. is the differ-
ence between the log means for blacks and whites, the ratio of sample means is expЕҪ1.733. s 5.7 s 0.522r0.092. However, for each race the sample variance is roughly double the mean. Table 13.6 also shows the fit of this model. The evidence of overdispersion is reflected by the higher observed counts at y s 0 and at large y values than the Poisson GLM predicts.
An alternative is the same model form but assuming a negative binomial response. A mixture model does seem plausible. Due to various demographic factors, heterogeneity probably occurs among subjects of a given race in the distribution of Y. For ML fitting, the deviance decreases by 122.2 compared to the ordinary Poisson GLM that is the special case with ky1 s 0. Table 13.6 also shows this model fit. It is dramatically better at y s 0 and 1.
Table 13.7 shows parameter estimates for the negative binomial and
Poisson GLMs. For both, вҗӨЛҶs 1.733 since both models provide fitted means equal to the sample means. However the estimated standard error of вҗӨЛҶ
increases from 0.147 for the Poisson GLM to 0.238 for the negative binomial model. The Wald 95% confidence interval for the ratio of means for blacks and whites goes from expw1.733 " 1.96ЕҪ0.147.x s ЕҪ4.2, 7.5. for the Poisson GLM to expw1.733 " 1.96ЕҪ0.238.x s ЕҪ3.5, 9.0. for the negative binomial. In accounting for the overdispersion, we obtain results that are not as precise as the more naive model suggests.
The negative binomial model has ЛҶky1 s 4.94 ЕҪSE s 1.00.. This shows
strong evidence that ky1 ) 0, indicating that the negative binomial model is more appropriate than the Poisson GLM. The estimated variance of Y is
вҗ®ЛҶ q вҗ®ЛҶ2rЛҶk s вҗ®ЛҶ q 4.94вҗ®ЛҶ2, which is 0.13 for whites and 1.87 for blacks, much
closer to the sample values than the Poisson model provides. Table 13.7 also shows results for negative binomial and Poisson models
using the identity link. The fits вҗ®ЛҶit s 0.092 q 0.430 xit reproduce the sample means. Now вҗӨЛҶ refers to the difference in means rather than their log ratio. The estimated difference вҗӨЛҶs 0.430 has SE s 0.058 for the Poisson model
and SE s 0.109 for the negative binomial. Results are more imprecise but

TABLE 13.7 Parameter Estimates for Models Fitted to Homicide Data

Models with Log Link

Models with Identity Link

Term

Neg. Binom. GLM

Poisson GLM

Poisson GLMM

Neg. Binom. GLM

Poisson GLM

вҗЈ вҗӨ
SEЕҪвҗӨЛҶ.

y2.38 1.733
0.238

y2.38 1.733
0.147

y3.69 1.897
0.246

0.092 0.430
0.109

0.092 0.430
0.058

POISSON REGRESSION WITH RANDOM EFFECTS

563

more realistic with the negative binomial model. For this link also the
estimated dispersion parameter is ЛҶky1 s 4.94.

13.5 POISSON REGRESSION WITH RANDOM EFFECTS

The GLMMs introduced in Chapter 12 referred to categorical responses. GLMMs are also useful for other types of discrete responses, such as counts. This section illustrates with Poisson regression modeling of count data.
WeвҖҷve seen that a flexible way to account for overdispersion is with a mixture model. In Section 13.4 we mixed the Poisson using the gamma distribution, yielding the negative binomial marginally. Breslow ЕҪ1984. and Hinde ЕҪ1982. suggested the GLMM structure ЕҪ12.1. with the log link and normal random intercept. The model for the mean for observation t in cluster i is

log E ЕҪ Yit < ui . s x itX вҗӨ q ui ,

ЕҪ 13 .14.

where Г„ui4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. Conditional on ui, yit has a Poisson distribution. Marginally, the distribution has variance greater than the mean whenever вҗҙ ) 0.
Applications of Poisson GLMMs include the analysis of maps of cancer rates in epidemiology ЕҪBreslow and Clayton 1993. and modeling variability in bacteria counts ЕҪAitchison and Ho 1989.. Although links other than the log are possible, the identity link ЕҪand any other link having range only the positive real line. has a structural problem. With a normal random effect with вҗҙ ) 0, a positive probability exists that the linear predictor is negative, but the Poisson mean must be nonnegative.
The negative binomial model ЕҪfor fixed k. is a GLMM with nonnormal random effect. With the log link, it results from a loglinear model of form ЕҪ13.14. with random intercept, where expЕҪui. has a gamma distribution with mean 1 and variance ky1. With identity link, negative binomial models usually work better than Poisson GLMMs. Regardless of the gamma mixture distribution, the resulting marginal mean is nonnegative for the negative binomial.

13.5.1 Marginal Model Implied by Poisson GLMM
The Poisson GLMM ЕҪ13.14. implies a relatively simple marginal model, averaging out the random effect. The mean of the marginal distribution is

E ЕҪ Y . s E E ЕҪ Y < u . s E w exXitвҗӨqu i x s exXitвҗӨqвҗҙ 2 r2 .

it

it i

Here EwexpЕҪui.x s expЕҪвҗҙ 2r2. because a NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . variate ui has moment generating function EwexpЕҪtui.x s expЕҪt 2вҗҙ 2r2.. So, for the Poisson GLMM

564

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

the log of the mean conditionally equals x itX вҗӨ q ui and marginally equals x itX вҗӨ q вҗҙ 2r2. A loglinear model still applies. The marginal effects of the explanatory variables are the same as the cluster-specific effects. Thus, the ratio of means at two different settings of x itX is the same conditionally and marginally. However, marginally the intercept is offset. ЕҪNote that JensenвҖҷs inequality applies, since the link is not linear..
The variance of the marginal distribution is

varЕҪ Yit . s E varЕҪ Yit < ui . q var E ЕҪ Yit < ui . s E w ex itX вҗӨqu i x q e2x itX вҗӨ varЕҪ eui . s ex q XitвҗӨqвҗҙ 2r2 e2xXitвҗӨ ЕҪ e2 вҗҙ 2 y eвҗҙ 2 . s E ЕҪ Yit . q E ЕҪ Yit . 2 ЕҪ eвҗҙ 2 y 1. .

Here, varЕҪ eui. s EЕҪ e2 ui. y w EЕҪ eui.x2 s e2 вҗҙ 2 y eвҗҙ 2 by evaluating the moment
generating function at t s 2 and t s 1. As in the negative binomial model,
the marginal variance is a quadratic function of the marginal mean. It exceeds the marginal mean when вҗҙ ) 0. The ordinary Poisson model results when вҗҙ s 0. When вҗҙ ) 0 the marginal distribution is not Poisson, and the extent to which the variance exceeds the mean increases as вҗҙ increases.
As in binary GLMMs, Yit and Yis are independent given ui but are marginally nonnegatively correlated. For t / s,

covЕҪ Yit , Yis . s E covЕҪ Yit , Yis < ui . q cov E ЕҪ Yit < ui . , E ЕҪ Yis < ui .

s 0 q cov expЕҪx itX вҗӨ q ui . , expЕҪx isX вҗӨ q ui . .

ЕҪ 13 .15.

The functions in the last covariance term are both monotone increasing functions of ui, and hence are nonnegatively correlated ЕҪProblem 13.44..

13.5.2 Frequency of Knowing Homicide Victims Example
We now return to Table 13.6 on responses, classified by race, of the number of victims of homicide within the past 12 months that subjects knew personally. Models permitting subject heterogeneity are sensible. For the response yit for subject t of race i, the Poisson GLMM is
log E ЕҪ Yit < uit . s вҗЈ q вҗӨ xit q uit ,
where Г„uit4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 .. The log means vary according to a NЕҪвҗЈ, вҗҙ 2 . distribution for whites and a NЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ, вҗҙ 2 . distribution for blacks. Given uit , yit has a Poisson distribution.
Table 13.6 also shows this model fit, and Table 13.7 shows estimates. The
random effects have вҗҙЛҶ s 1.63 ЕҪSE s 0.15.. The deviance decreases by 116.6
compared to the Poisson GLM, indicating a better fit by allowing heterogeneity. For subjects at the means of the random effects distributions ЕҪuit s 0. the estimated expected responses are expЕҪy3.69 q 1.90. s 0.167 for blacks and

NOTES

565

expЕҪy3.69. s 0.025 for whites. The fitted marginal mean is expЕҪвҗЈЛҶ q вҗӨЛҶxit q вҗҙЛҶ 2r2., or 0.63 for blacks and 0.09 for whites. The fitted marginal variances
are 0.21 for blacks and 5.78 for whites. These are somewhat larger than the sample means and variances, perhaps because the fitted distribution has nonnegligible mass above the largest observed response of 6.

13.5.3 Negative Binomial Models versus Poisson GLMMs
The Poisson GLMM with normal random effects has the advantage, relative to the negative binomial GLM, of easily permitting multivariate random effects and multilevel models. However, the negative binomial has properties that can make interpretation simpler. WeвҖҷve seen that the identity link is valid for it, which is useful for simple examples such as the preceding one with a factor predictor. With any link and a factor predictor, its ML fitted means equal the sample means. This is not the case for the Poisson GLMM.
Besides the Poisson GLMM and the negative binomial model, an alternative way of accounting for overdispersion with count data is quasi-likelihood with variance function
В®ЕҪ вҗ®i . s вҗҫвҗ®i ,
for some constant вҗҫ. This is often adequate for exploratory analyses.

NOTES

Section 13.1: Latent Class Models

13.1. 13.2.

Aitkin et al. ЕҪ1981., Bartholomew and Knott ЕҪ1999., Clogg ЕҪ1995., Clogg and Goodman ЕҪ1984., Goodman ЕҪ1974., Haberman ЕҪ1979, Chap. 10., Hagenaars ЕҪ1998., Heinen ЕҪ1996., and Lazarsfeld and Henry ЕҪ1968. discussed fitting and intrepretation of latent
class and related latent variable models. Rudas et al. ЕҪ1994. proposed a clever mixture method for summarizing goodness of fit. For a model M for a contingency table with true probabilities вҗІ, they used the mixture вҗІ s ЕҪ1 y вҗі .вҗІ1 q вҗі вҗІ2 , with вҗІ1 the model-based probabilities and вҗІ2 unconstrained. Their index of lack of fit is the smallest such вҗі possible for which this holds. It is the
fraction of the population that cannot be described by the model. This recognizes that any given model does not truly hold but is useful if вҗі is close to 0. The mixture contrasts with the latent class model in which both вҗІ1 and вҗІ2 correspond to independence.

Section 13.2: Nonparametric Random Effects Models

13.3.

For connections between Rasch-type models and quasi-symmetry models, see Agresti ЕҪ1993., Conaway ЕҪ1989., Darroch ЕҪ1981., Darroch et al. ЕҪ1993., Hatzinger ЕҪ1989., and Kelderman ЕҪ1984.. For the matched-pairs random effects model ЕҪ12.16., a nonparametric or conditional ML treatment of ЕҪui1, ui2 . implies a multivariate quasi-symmetry model ЕҪAgresti 1997.. Model ЕҪ12.16. with correlated normal random effects is a

566

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

continuous analog to discrete latent class models that Goodman ЕҪ1974. proposed, based on two associated binary latent variables.

Section 13.3: Beta-Binomial Models

13.4. 13.5.

Skellam ЕҪ1948. introduced the beta-binomial distribution and discussed parameter estimation. For modeling using this distribution or related quasi-likelihood approaches, see Brooks et al. ЕҪ1997., Crowder ЕҪ1978., Hinde ЕҪ1996., Lee and Nelder ЕҪ1996., Liang and Hanfelt ЕҪ1994., Liang and McCullagh ЕҪ1993., Lindsey and Altham ЕҪ1998., Moore ЕҪ1986a., Moore and Tsiatis ЕҪ1991., Nelder and Pregibon ЕҪ1987., Prentice ЕҪ1986., Rosner ЕҪ1984, 1989. wwith critique by Neuhaus and Jewell ЕҪ1990a.x, Slaton et al. ЕҪ2000., and Williams ЕҪ1975, 1982.. For beta-binomial type variance, Ryan ЕҪ1995. and Williams ЕҪ1988. showed advantages of the quasi-likelihood approach over ML. Often, it helps to permit the quasi-likelihood scale parameter вҗі ЕҪor the related parameter вҗӘ in the beta-binomial. to vary among groups.
The beta-binomial generalizes to a Dirichlet-multinomial. Conditional on the probabilities, the distribution is multinomial. The probabilities themselves have a Dirichlet distribution, which is a generalization of the beta defined on vectors of probabilities that sum to 1. See Mosimann ЕҪ1962. and Paul et al. ЕҪ1989.. Kupper et al. ЕҪ1986. and Ryan ЕҪ1992. discussed modeling overdispersion caused by litter effects in developmental toxicity studies. See Follman and Lambert ЕҪ1989., Kupper and Haseman ЕҪ1978., and Lefkopoulou et al. ЕҪ1989. for related material.

Section 13.4: NegatiВ©e Binomial Regression
13.6. Greenwood and Yule ЕҪ1920. derived the negative binomial as a gamma mixture of Poissons. Johnson et al. ЕҪ1992. summarized its properties. Biggeri ЕҪ1998., Cameron and
Trivedi ЕҪ1998., Hinde and DemВҙetrio ЕҪ1998., and Lawless ЕҪ1987. discussed modeling
using it.

PROBLEMS
Applications
13.1 For the 23 table of opinions about legalized abortion ЕҪTable 10.13. collapsed over gender, fit a latent class model with two classes. Show that it is saturated. For each latent class, report the estimated probability of supporting legalized abortion in each of the three situations. Give a tentative interpretation for the classes.
13.2 Analyze Table 8.3 using a latent class model with q s 2. a. For a subject in the first latent class, estimate the probability of having used ЕҪi. marijuana, ЕҪii. alcohol, ЕҪiii. cigarettes, ЕҪiv. all three, and ЕҪv. none of them. b. Estimate the probability a subject is in the first latent class, given they have used ЕҪi. marijuana, ЕҪii. alcohol, ЕҪiii. cigarettes, ЕҪiv. all three, and ЕҪv. none of them.

PROBLEMS

567

13.3 Analyze Table 8.19 on government spending using latent class models.
13.4 For captureбҺҗrecapture experiments, Coull and Agresti ЕҪ1999. used a loglinear model with exchangeable association and no higher-order terms. Explain why the model expected frequencies satisfy

log вҗ®ЕҪ y1 , . . . , yT . s вҗӯ q вҗӨ1 y1 q РёРёРё qвҗӨT yT q вҗӨ ЕҪ y1 y2 q y1 y3 q РёРёРё qyTy1 yT . .

Show that the fit of this model to Table 12.6 yields NЛҶ s 90.5 and a
95% profile-likelihood confidence interval for N of ЕҪ75, 125..

13.5 Use or write software to replicate the analyses of the opinions about abortion data in Section 13.2 using ЕҪa. nonparametric random effects fitting of logit model ЕҪ13.3., and ЕҪb. the quasi-symmetry model.

13.6 A data set on pregnancy rates among girls under 18 years of age in 13 north central Florida counties has information on a 3-year total for each county i on ni s number of births and yi s number of those for which mother had age under 18 ЕҪsee J. Booth, in Statistical Modelling: Lecture Notes in Statistics, 104, Springer, 43бҺҗ52, 1995.. a. A beta-binomial model states that given Г„вҗІi4, Г„Yi4 are independent Г„binЕҪ ni, вҗІi.4 variates, and Г„вҗІi4 are independent from a betaЕҪвҗЈ, вҗӨ .
distribution. The ML estimated parameters are вҗЈЛҶ s 9.9 and вҗӨЛҶs
240.8 ЕҪthanks to J. Booth for this analysis.. Use the mean and variance to describe the estimated beta distribution and the estimated marginal distribution of Yi ЕҪas a function of ni.. b. Quasi-likelihood using variance function ЕҪ13.10. for the model
logitЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗЈ has вҗЈЛҶ s y3.18 and вҗіЛҶ s 0.005. Describe the esti-
mated mean and variance of Yi. c. Quasi-likelihood using variance ЕҪ13.11. for the model logitЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗЈ
has вҗЈЛҶ s y3.35 and вҗҫЛҶ s 8.3. Describe the estimated mean and
variance of Yi.
d. The logistic-normal GLMM, logitЕҪвҗІi. s вҗЈ q ui, yields вҗЈЛҶ s y3.24 and вҗҙЛҶ s 0.33. Describe the estimated mean of Yi wRecall ЕҪ12.8.x.
13.7 In Problem 12.2 about Shaq OX NealвҖҷs free-throw shooting, the simple binomial model, вҗІi s вҗЈ , has lack of fit. Fit the beta-binomial model, or use the quasi-likelihood approach with that variance structure. Use the fit to summarize his free-throw shooting, by giving an estimated mean and standard deviation for вҗІi.

568

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

13.8 For the toxicity study of Table 12.9, collapsing to a binary response, consider linear logit models for the probability a fetus is normal.
a. Does the ordinary binomial model show evidence of overdispersion?
b. Fit the linear logit model using the quasi-likelihood approach with inflated binomial variance. How do the standard errors change?
c. Fit the linear logit model using quasi-likelihood with beta-binomial variance. Interpret and compare with previous results.
d. Fit the linear logit model using a GEE approach with exchangeable working correlation among fetuses in the same litter. Interpret and compare with previous results, including comparing the
estimated GEE correlation with the estimate вҗіЛҶ from part ЕҪc..
e. Fit the linear logit GLMM after adding a litter-specific normal random effect. Interpret and compare with previous results.
13.9 Extend the various analyses of the teratology data ЕҪTable 4.5. in Section 13.3.3 as follows: a. Include a predictor for litter size ЕҪas well as group.. Interpret, and compare results to those without this predictor. b. Fit a model with beta-binomial variance ЕҪ13.10. in which вҗі varies by treatment group. Use results to motivate a model that allows overdispersion only in the placebo group. Interpret and compare results to those with common вҗі for each group.

13.10

Table 13.8 reports the results of a study of fish hatching under three environments. Eggs from seven clutches were randomly assigned to three treatments, and the response was whether an egg hatched by day 10. The three treatments were ЕҪ1. carbon dioxide and oxygen removed, ЕҪ2. carbon dioxide only removed, and ЕҪ3. neither removed.

TABLE 13.8 Data for Problem 13.10

Clutch

Treatment 1

Number Hatched

Total

Treatment 2

Number Hatched

Total

Treatment 3

Number Hatched

Total

1

0

2

0

3

0

4

0

5

0

6

0

7

0

6

3

6

0

6

13

0

13

0

13

10

8

10

6

9

16

10

16

9

16

32

25

28

23

30

7

7

7

5

7

21

10

20

4

20

Source: Data courtesy of Becca Hale, Zoology Department, University of Florida.

PROBLEMS

569

a. Let вҗІit denote the probability of hatching for an egg from clutch i in treatment t. Assuming independent binomial observations, fit the model
logitЕҪвҗІ it . s вҗӨ1 z1 q вҗӨ2 z2 q вҗӨ3 z3 ,

where zt s 1 for treatment t and 0 otherwise. What does your
software report for вҗӨЛҶ1, and what should it be? ЕҪ Hint: Note that
treatment 1 has no successes..
b. Analyze these data using an approach that allows overdispersion. Interpret. Indicate whether evidence of overdispersion occurs for treatments 2 and 3.

13.11

For the train accidents in Problem 9.19, a negative binomial model assuming constant log rate over the 14-year period has estimate y4.177 ЕҪSE s 0.153. and estimated dispersion parameter 0.012. Interpret.

13.12

One question in the 1990 General Social Survey asked subjects how many times they had sexual intercourse in the preceding month. Table 13.9 shows responses, classified by gender.
a. The sample means were 5.9 for males and 4.3 for females; the sample variances were 54.8 and 34.4. The mode for each gender was 0. Does an ordinary Poisson GLM seem appropriate? Explain.
b. The Poisson GLM with log link and a dummy variable for gender ЕҪ1 s males, 0 s females. has gender estimate 0.308 ЕҪSE s 0.038.. Explain why this implies a ratio of 1.36 for the fitted means. ЕҪThis is also the ratio of sample means, since this model has fitted means equal to sample means.. Show that the Wald 95% confidence interval for the ratio of means for males and females is ЕҪ1.26, 1.47..

TABLE 13.9 Data for Problem 13.12

Response Male Female Response Male Female Response

0

65 128

9

2

2

20

1

11

17

10

24

13

22

2

13

23

12

6

10

23

3

14

16

13

3

3

24

4

26

19

14

0

1

25

5

13

17

15

3

10

27

6

15

17

16

3

1

30

7

7

3

17

0

1

50

8

21

15

18

0

1

60

Source:1990 General Social Survey, National Opinion Research Center.

Male
7 0 0 1 1 0 3 1 1

Female
6 1 1 0 3 1 1 0 0

570

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

c. For the negative binomial model, the log likelihood increases by 248.7 ЕҪdeviance decreases by 497.3.. The estimated difference between the log means is also 0.308, but now SE s 0.127. Show that the 95% confidence interval for the ratio of means is ЕҪ1.06, 1.75.. Compare to the Poisson GLM, and interpret.
d. The mode for the Poisson distribution is the integer part of the mean, rather than 0. Argue that a possibly more realistic mixture model assumes for gender i a proportion вҗіi that has a Poisson distribution with mean 0 and a proportion 1 y вҗіi that has distribution that is a gamma mixture of Poissons. Explain why the corresponding marginal distribution for each gender is a mixture of a degenerate distribution at 0 and a negative binomial distribution.

13.13

Refer to Problem 13.12. Fit the Poisson and negative binomial GLMs using identity link. Show that the estimated differences in means between males and females are identical for the two GLMs but the SE values are very different. Explain why. Use the more appropriate one to form a confidence interval for the true difference in means.

13.14

For the counts of horseshoe-crab satellites in Table 4.3, Table 13.10 shows the results of ML fitting of the negative binomial model using width as the predictor, with the identity link.
a. State and interpret the prediction equation.
b. Show that at a predicted вҗ®ЛҶ, the estimated variance is roughly вҗ®ЛҶ q вҗ®ЛҶ2.
c. The corresponding Poisson GLM has fit вҗ®ЛҶ s y11.53 q 0.55 x
ЕҪSE s 0.06.. Compare 95% confidence intervals for the slopes for the two models. Interpret, and indicate whether overdispersion seems to exist relative to the Poisson GLM.

TABLE 13.10 Results for Problem 13.14

Parameter Intercept width Dispersion

Estimate y11.1471
0.5308 0.9843

Standard Error 2.8275 0.1132 0.1822

Wald 95% Confidence

Limits

y16.6890 y5.6052

0.3089

0.7528

0.6847

1.4149

ChiSquare 15.54 21.97

13.15

Refer to Problem 13.14.
a. Fit a negative binomial model with log link. Interpret. Plot the counts against width and indicate which link seems more appropriate.
b. Fit a Poisson GLMM with log link, using width predictor. Interpret.

PROBLEMS

571

c. Compare results for the various models, including those in Section 4.3.2 for a Poisson GLM. Indicate your preferred model. Justify.

13.16

Refer to Problems 13.14 and 13.15. Using width and qualitative color as predictors, fit a ЕҪa. negative binomial GLM, and ЕҪb. Poisson GLMM, checking for interaction and interpreting the final model.

13.17

Refer to Table 13.6. For those with race classified as вҖҳвҖҳother,вҖҷвҖҷ the sample counts for ЕҪ0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. homicides were ЕҪ55, 5, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0.. Fit an appropriate model simultaneously to these data and those for white and black race categories. Interpret by making pairwise comparisons of the three pairs of means.

13.18 Use a quasi-likelihood approach to analyze Table 13.6 on counts of murder victims.

13.19 13.20

Conduct the analyses of Problem 4.6 on defects in the fabrication of computer chips, but use a negative binomial GLM. Compare results to those for the Poisson GLM. Indicate why results are similar.
With data at the bookвҖҷs Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdar cda.html., use methods of this chapter to analyze how the countywide vote for the Reform Party candidate Pat Buchanan in the 2000 presidential election related to the vote for Reform Party candidate Ross Perot in the 1996 presidential election. Note that Palm Beach County is an enormous outlier ЕҪapparently mainly reflecting votes intended for Al Gore but cast for Buchanan because of a confusing ballot.. Model with and without that observation and compare results.

13.21 13.22

Conduct a latent class analysis of the data in Espeland and Handelman ЕҪ1989..
Refer to the teratology study in Liang and Hanfelt ЕҪ1994.. Analyze these data using at least two different approaches for overdispersed binary data. Compare results and interpret.

13.23

Refer to Problem 13.14. Using an appropriate subset of width, weight, color, and spine condition as predictors, find and interpret a reasonable model for predicting the number of satellites.

Theory and Methods

13.24

Derive residual df for a latent class model with q latent classes. When
I s 2, for q G 2 show one needs T G 4 for the model to be unsaturated. Then, find the maximum value for q when T s 4, 5. For an I 2 table, show one needs q - I 2rЕҪ2 I y 1..

572

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

13.25

Express the log likelihood for latent class model ЕҪ13.1. in terms of the model parameters. Derive likelihood equations ЕҪGoodman 1974, Haberman 1979..

13.26

Let вҢё denote an I = J matrix of cell probabilities for the joint distribution of X and Y. Suppose that there exist I = 1 column vectors вҗІ1k and J = 1 column vectors вҗІ2 k of probabilities, k s 1, . . . , q, and a set of probabilities Г„ вҗіk4 such that

q
вҢё s Гқ вҗіkвҗІ1kвҗІ2 k X .
ks1

Explain why this implies that there is a latent variable Z such that X and Y are conditionally independent, given Z.

13.27

In Section 13.2.2, under the null that the ordinary logistic regression model holds, explain why it is inappropriate to treat the difference between the deviances for that model and the mixture of two logistic regressions as a chi-squared statistic.

13.28

Refer to Problem 12.7. Let вҗ®kЕҪ a, b, c. denote the expected frequency of outcomes ЕҪ a, b, c. for treatments ЕҪ A, B, C. under treatment sequence k, where outcome 1 s relief and 0 s nonrelief. With a nonparametric random effects approach, show that one can estimate treatment effects in model ЕҪ12.19. by fitting the quasi-symmetry model

log вҗ®k ЕҪ a, b, c. s aвҗӨA q bвҗӨB q cвҗӨC q вҗӯk ЕҪ a, b, c. ,

where вҗӯkЕҪ a, b, c. s вҗӯkЕҪ a, c, b. s вҗӯkЕҪ b, a, c. s вҗӯkЕҪ b, c, a. s
вҗӯkЕҪc, a, b. s вҗӯkЕҪc, b, a.. Fit the model, and show that вҗӨЛҶB y вҗӨЛҶA s 1.64 ЕҪSE s 0.34., вҗӨЛҶC y вҗӨЛҶA s 2.23 ЕҪSE s 0.39., вҗӨЛҶC y вҗӨЛҶB s 0.59 ЕҪSE s
0.39.. Interpret. Compare results with Problem 12.7 for model ЕҪ12.19..
13.29 Show that the beta-binomial distribution ЕҪ13.9. simplifies to the binomial when вҗӘ s 0.

13.30 13.31

Express the numerator of the beta density in terms of вҗ® and вҗӘ. Using this, show that it is ЕҪa. unimodal when вҗӘ - minЕҪвҗ®, 1 y вҗ®., and ЕҪb. the uniform density when вҗ® s вҗӘ s 21 .
Suppose that вҗІi s PЕҪYit s 1. s 1 y PЕҪYit s 0., for t s 1, . . . , ni, and corrЕҪYit , Yis. s вҗі for t / s. Show that varЕҪYit . s вҗІ iЕҪ1 y вҗІ i.,

PROBLEMS

573

covЕҪYit , Yis. s вҗівҗІ iЕҪ1 y вҗІ i., and
Еҫ / var Гқ Yit s niвҗІi ЕҪ1 y вҗІi . 1 q вҗі ЕҪ ni y 1. . t

13.32

When n s 1, show that the beta-binomial distribution is no different from the binomial ЕҪi.e., Bernoulli.. Explain why overdispersion cannot occur when n s 1.

13.33

When yi is the sum of ni binary responses each having mean вҗ®i, refer to the quasi-likelihood approach with В®ЕҪвҗ®i. s вҗҫ ni вҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i.. Explain why this variance function has a structural problem, with only вҗҫ s 1 making sense when ni s 1.

13.34

Liang and Hanfelt ЕҪ1994. described a teratology study comparing control and treatment groups in which the ML estimate of the treatment effect in a beta-binomial model differs by a factor of 2 depending on whether one assumes the same overdispersion parameter for each group. By contrast, with variance function ЕҪ13.11., the quasi-likelihood estimate of the treatment effect is the same whether one assumes the same or different вҗҫ for the two groups. Explain why, and discuss whether this is an advantage or disadvantage of that method.

13.35

Consider

the

logistic-normal

model,

logit

ЕҪвҗІ

i

.

s

вҗЈ

q

x

X i

вҗӨ

q

u

i

.

For

small вҗҙ , show that it corresponds approximately to a mixture model

for which the mixture distribution has var ЕҪвҗІi. s wвҗ®iЕҪ1 y вҗ®i.x2вҗҙ 2.

ЕҪ Hint: See Problem 6.33..

13.36

Altham ЕҪ1978. introduced the discrete distribution
Еҫ / f ЕҪ y ; вҗІ , вҗә . s cЕҪвҗІ , вҗә . ny вҗІ y ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . nyy exp вҗә yЕҪ n y y. ,

y s 0,1, . . . , n,

where cЕҪвҗІ , вҗә . is a normalizing constant. Show that this is in the exponential family. Show that the binomial occurs when вҗә s 0. wAltham noted that overdispersion occurs when вҗә - 0. Corcoran et al. ЕҪ2001. and Lindsey and Altham ЕҪ1998. used this as the basis of
an alternative model to the beta-binomial.x

13.37 When y1, . . . , yN are independent from the negative binomial distri-
bution ЕҪ13.13. with k fixed, show that вҗ®ЛҶ s y.

574

OTHER MIXTURE MODELS FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

13.38

Using EЕҪY . s Ew EЕҪY < X .x and varЕҪY . s EwvarЕҪY < X .x q varw EЕҪY < X .x, derive the mean and variance of the ЕҪa. beta-binomial distribution, and ЕҪb. negative binomial distribution.

13.39

Suppose that given u, Y is Poisson with EЕҪY < u. s uвҗ®, where вҗ® may
depend on predictors. Suppose that u is a positive random variable with EЕҪu. s 1 and varЕҪu. s вҗ¶ . Show that EЕҪY . s вҗ® and varЕҪY . s вҗ® q вҗ¶вҗ®2. Explain how negative binomial GLMs and Poisson GLMMs
with log link can follow as special cases.

13.40 An alternative negative binomial parameterization results from the gamma density formula,

f ЕҪ вҗӯ; k , вҗ®. ЕҪ k . s expЕҪykвҗӯ. вҗӯkвҗ®y1 kвҗ® , вҢ«ЕҪ kвҗ®.

вҗӯ G 0,

for which EЕҪ вҗӯ. s вҗ®, varЕҪ вҗӯ. s вҗ®rk. Show that this gamma mixture of Poissons yields a negative binomial with

EЕҪ Y . s вҗ®, varЕҪ Y . s вҗ®ЕҪ1 q k . rk .

For what limiting value of k does this reduce to the Poisson? wSee Nelder and Lee ЕҪ1996. for ML model fitting. Cameron and Trivedi ЕҪ1998, p. 75. pointed out that, unlike with quadratic variance, consistency does not occur for parameter estimators when the model for the mean holds but the true distribution is not negative binomial.x

13.41

The negative binomial distribution is unimodal with a mode at the integer part of вҗ®ЕҪ k y 1.rk ЕҪJohnson et al. 1992, pp. 208бҺҗ209.. Show that the mode is 0 when вҗ® F 1, and that when вҗ® ) 1 the mode is still 0 if k - вҗ®rЕҪвҗ® y 1.. ЕҪThis gives greater scope than the Poisson, since its mode equals the integer part of the mean..

13.42

Consider the loglinear random effects model
log E ЕҪ Yit < u i . s x itX вҗӨ q z itX u i ,
where Г„u i4 are independent NЕҪ0, вҢә.. Show that this implies the marginal loglinear model

log E ЕҪ Yit . y 1 z itX вҢә z it s x itX вҗӨ ,
2

PROBLEMS

575

with the same fixed effects but with offset term. For the random-intercept case, indicate the role of вҗҙ on the size of the offset. Explain what happens when вҗҙ s 0.

13.43

In Section 13.5.1 and Problem 13.42 we saw that for Poisson GLMMs, the marginal effects are the same as the cluster-specific effects. This does not imply that ML estimates of effects are the same for a Poisson GLMM and a Poisson GLM. Explain why. ЕҪ Hint: For the GLMM, is the marginal distribution Poisson?.

13.44 For the Poisson GLMM ЕҪ13.14., use the normal mgf to show that for t / s,

covЕҪ Yit , Yis . s exp ЕҪx itX q x isX . вҗӨ expЕҪ вҗҙ 2 . ЕҪexpЕҪ вҗҙ 2 . y 1.

Hence, find corrЕҪYit , Yis..

13.45

Consider a Poisson GLMM using the identity link. Relate the marginal mean and variance to the conditional mean and variance. Explain the structural problem that this model has.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 14
Asymptotic Theory for Parametric Models
This chapter has a more theoretical flavor than others. It presents asymptotic theory for parametric models for categorical data, with emphasis on multinomial models for contingency tables. In Section 14.1 we review and extend the delta method. This is used to derive large-sample normal distributions for many statistics. In Section 14.2 we apply the delta method to ML estimation of parameters in models for contingency tables, later illustrated in Section 14.4 for logit and loglinear models. In Section 14.3 we derive asymptotic distributions of cell residuals and the X 2 and G2 goodness-of-fit statistics.
The results in this chapter have a long history. Pearson ЕҪ1900. derived the asymptotic chi-squared distribution of X 2 for testing a specified multinomial distribution. Fisher ЕҪ1922, 1924. showed the adjustment in degrees of freedom when multinomial probabilities are functions of unknown parameters.
CramВҙer ЕҪ1946, pp. 424бҺҗ434. formally proved this result, under the assump-
tion that ML estimators of the parameters are consistent. Rao ЕҪ1957. proved consistency of the ML estimators under general conditions. He also gave the asymptotic distribution of the ML estimators, although the primary emphasis of his articles was on proving consistency. Birch ЕҪ1964a. proved these results under weaker conditions. Andersen ЕҪ1980., Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975., Cox ЕҪ1984., Haberman ЕҪ1974a., and Watson ЕҪ1959. provided other proofs or considered related cases.
As in CramВҙerвҖҷs and RaoвҖҷs proofs, our derivation regards the ML estimator
as a point in the parameter space where the derivative of the log likelihood function is zero. Birch regarded it as a point at which the likelihood takes value arbitrarily near its supremum. Although his approach is more powerful, the proofs are more complex. We avoid a formal вҖҳвҖҳtheoremбҺҗproofвҖҷвҖҷ style of exposition. Instead, we show that powerful results follow from simple mathematical ideas, such as Taylor series expansions.
576

DELTA METHOD

577

14.1 DELTA METHOD

Suppose that a statistic used as an estimator of a parameter has a large-sample normal distribution. Then, in this section we show that many functions of that statistic are also asymptotically normal.

14.1.1 O, o Rates of Convergence
Big O and little o notation is useful for describing limiting behavior of sequences. For real numbers Г„ zn4, the little o notation oЕҪ zn. represents a term that has smaller order than zn as n в„ў Пұ, in the sense that oЕҪ zn.rzn в„ў 0
as n в„ў Пұ. For instance, 'n is oЕҪ n. as n в„ў Пұ, since 'n rn в„ў 0 as n в„ў Пұ.
A sequence that is oЕҪ1. satisfies oЕҪ1.r1 s oЕҪ1. в„ў 0; for instance, ny1r2 is oЕҪ1. as n в„ў Пұ.
The big O notation OЕҪ zn. represents terms that have the same order of
magnitude as zn, in the sense that OЕҪ zn . rzn is bounded as n в„ў Пұ. For
instance, ЕҪ3rn. q ЕҪ8rn2 . is OЕҪ ny1 . as n в„ў Пұ; dividing it by ny1 gives a ratio that takes value close to 3 as n increases.
Similar notation applies to sequences of random variables. This notation uses a subscript p to indicate that the sequence has probabilistic rather than deterministic behavior. The symbol opЕҪ zn. denotes a random variable of smaller order than zn for large n, in the sense that opЕҪ zn.rzn conВ®erges
in probability to 0; that is, for any fixed в‘Җ ) 0, PЕҪ opЕҪ zn . rzn F в‘Җ . в„ў 1 as
n в„ў Пұ. The notation OpЕҪ zn. represents a random variable such that for every
в‘Җ ) 0, there is a constant K and an integer n0 such that Pw OpЕҪ zn . rzn - K x
) 1 y в‘Җ for all n ) n0. To illustrate, let Yn denote the sample mean of n independent observa-
tions Y1, . . . , Yn from a distribution having EЕҪYi. s вҗ®. Then ЕҪYn y вҗ®. s opЕҪ1., since ЕҪYn y вҗ®.r1 converges in probability to zero as n в„ў Пұ by the law of large numbers. By TchebychevвҖҷs inequality, the difference between a random variable and its expected value has the same order of magnitude as the standard deviation of that random variable. Since Yn y вҗ® has standard
deviation вҗҙr'n , ЕҪYn y вҗ®. s OpЕҪ ny1r2 ..
A random variable that is OpЕҪ ny1r2 . is also opЕҪ1.. An example is ЕҪYn y вҗ®.. Multiplication affects the order in the way one expects intuitively ЕҪProblem
14.1.. For instance, 'n ЕҪYn y вҗ®. s n1r2 OpЕҪ ny1r2 . s OpЕҪ n1r2 ny1r2 . s OpЕҪ1..
If the difference between two random variables is opЕҪ1. as n в„ў Пұ, SlutzkyвҖҷs theorem states that those random variables have the same limiting distribution.

14.1.2 Delta Method for Function of Random Variable
Let Tn denote a statistic, the subscript expressing its dependence on the sample size n. For large samples, suppose that Tn is approximately normally

578

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

distributed about вҗӘ , with approximate standard error вҗҙr'n . More precisely, as n в„ў Пұ, suppose that the cdf of 'n ЕҪTn y вҗӘ . converges to a NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . cdf.
This limiting behavior is an example of conВ®ergence in distribution, denoted

'n ЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ . d NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . .

6

ЕҪ 14 .1.

For a function g, we now derive the limiting distribution of gЕҪTn.. Suppose that g is at least twice differentiable at вҗӘ. We use the Taylor series expansion for gЕҪt. in a neighborhood of вҗӘ. For some вҗӘ * between t and вҗӘ ,

g ЕҪ t . s g ЕҪ вҗӘ . q ЕҪ t y вҗӘ . gX ЕҪ вҗӘ . q ЕҪ t y вҗӘ . 2 gY ЕҪ вҗӘ *. r2
s gЕҪвҗӘ . q ЕҪ t y вҗӘ . gXЕҪвҗӘ . q OЕҪ t y вҗӘ 2..

Substituting the random variable Tn for t, we have
'n g ЕҪ Tn . y g ЕҪ вҗӘ . s 'n ЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ . gX ЕҪ вҗӘ . q 'n O ЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ 2.
s 'n ЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ . gX ЕҪ вҗӘ . q Op ЕҪ ny1r2 .

ЕҪ 14 .2.

since

'n O ЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ 2. s 'n O OpЕҪ ny1 . s OpЕҪ ny1r2 . .
Since the OpЕҪ ny1r2 . term is asymptotically negligible, 'n w gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ .x has the same limiting distribution as 'n ЕҪTn y вҗӘ . gXЕҪвҗӘ .; that is, gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ .
behaves like the constant multiple gXЕҪвҗӘ . of ЕҪTn y вҗӘ .. Now, ЕҪTn y вҗӘ . is approximately normal with variance вҗҙ 2rn. Thus, gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ . is approximately normal with variance вҗҙ 2w gXЕҪвҗӘ .x2rn. More precisely,

'n g ЕҪ Tn . y g ЕҪ вҗӘ . d N ЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 gX ЕҪ вҗӘ . 2. .

6

ЕҪ 14 .3.

Figure 3.1 illustrated this result, and in Section 3.1.6 it was applied to the sample logit.
Result ЕҪ14.3. is called the delta method for obtaining asymptotic distributions. Since вҗҙ 2 s вҗҙ 2ЕҪвҗӘ . and gXЕҪвҗӘ . usually depends on вҗӘ , the asymptotic variance is unknown. Let вҗҙ 2ЕҪTn. and gXЕҪTn. denote these terms evaluated at the sample estimator Tn of вҗӘ. When gXЕҪРё. and вҗҙ s вҗҙ ЕҪРё. are continuous at вҗӘ , вҗҙ ЕҪTn. gXЕҪTn. is a consistent estimator of вҗҙ ЕҪвҗӘ . gXЕҪвҗӘ .. Thus, confidence inter-
vals and tests use the result that 'n w gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ .xrвҗҙ ЕҪTn. gX ЕҪ Tn . is asymp-
totically standard normal. For instance,
g ЕҪ Tn . " zвҗЈ r2 вҗҙ ЕҪ Tn . gX ЕҪ Tn . r'n
is a large-sample 100ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ .% confidence interval for gЕҪвҗӘ ..

DELTA METHOD

579

When gXЕҪвҗӘ . s 0, ЕҪ14.3. is uninformative because the limiting variance
equals 0. In that case, 'n w gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ .x s opЕҪ1., and higher-order terms in
the Taylor series expansion yield the asymptotic distribution ЕҪsee Note 14.1..

14.1.3 Delta Method for Function of Random Vector

The delta method generalizes to functions of random В®ectors. Suppose that Tn s ЕҪTn1, . . . , Tn N .X is asymptotically multivariate normal with mean вҗӘ s ЕҪвҗӘ1, . . . , вҗӘN .X and covariance matrix вҢәrn. Suppose that gЕҪt1, . . . , tN . has a nonzero differential вҗҫ s ЕҪвҗҫ1, . . . , вҗҫN .X at вҗӘ, where

СЁg вҗҫi s СЁ ti tsвҗӘ .

Then,

'n g ЕҪTn . y g ЕҪ вҗӘ.

d

X

NЕҪ0, вҗҫ вҢәвҗҫ. .

6

ЕҪ 14 .4.

For large n, gЕҪTn. has distribution similar to the normal with mean gЕҪвҗӘ. and
X
variance вҗҫ вҢә вҗҫrn. The proof of ЕҪ14.4. follows from the expansion

g ЕҪTn . y g ЕҪ вҗӘ. s ЕҪTn y вҗӘ.X вҗҫ q oЕҪ Tn y вҗӘ . ,
where z s ЕҪГқ z 2i .1r2 denotes the length of vector z. For large n, gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ. behaves like a linear function of the approximately normal random vector ЕҪTn y вҗӘ.. Thus, it itself is approximately normal.

14.1.4 Asymptotic Normality of Functions of Multinomial Counts

The delta method for random vectors implies asymptotic normality of many
functions of cell counts in contingency tables. Suppose that cell counts ЕҪ n1, . . . , nN . have a multinomial distribution with cell probabilities вҗІ s ЕҪвҗІ 1, . . . , вҗІN .X. Let n s n1 q РёРёРё qnN , and let p s ЕҪ p1, . . . , pN .X denote the sample proportions, where pi s nirn.
Denote observation i of the n cross-classified in the contingency table by Yi s ЕҪYi1, . . . , Yi N ., where Yi j s 1 if it falls in cell j, and Yi j s 0 otherwise, i s 1, . . . , n. For instance, Y6 s ЕҪ0, 0, 1, 0,0, . . . , 0. means that observation 6 is in the third cell of the table. Now, since each observation falls in just one cell, ГқjYi j s 1 and Yi jYik s 0 when j / k. Also, pj s ГқiYi jrn, and

E

ЕҪ

Yi

j

.

s

P

ЕҪ

Yi

j

s

1.

s

вҗІ

j

s

E

ЕҪ

Yi

2 j

.

,

E ЕҪ Yi jYik . s 0 if j / k.

It follows that
EЕҪYi . s вҗІ and covЕҪYi . s вҢә , i s 1, . . . , n,

580

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

where вҢә s ЕҪвҗҙjk . with
вҗҙj j s varЕҪ Yi j . s E ЕҪ Yi j2 . y EЕҪ Yi j . 2 s вҗІj ЕҪ1 y вҗІj . ,
вҗҙjk s covЕҪ Yi j , Yik . s E ЕҪ Yi jYik . y E ЕҪ Yi j . EЕҪ Yik . s yвҗІjвҗІ k for j / k.

The matrix вҢә has form

вҢә s diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІX

where diagЕҪ вҗІ. is the diagonal matrix with the elements of вҗІ on the main diagonal.
Since p is a sample mean of n independent observations, namely

Гқis1 n Yi

ps

,

n

covЕҪp. s diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІX rn.

ЕҪ 14 .5.

This covariance matrix is singular, because of the linear dependence Гқ pi s 1. The multivariate central limit theorem ЕҪRao 1973, p. 128. implies

6

'n ЕҪp y вҗІ . d N 0, diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІX .

ЕҪ 14 .6.

By the delta method, functions of p having nonzero differential at вҗІ are also asymptotically normal. Let gЕҪt1, . . . , tN . be a differentiable function, and let

вҗҫi s СЁ grСЁвҗІi , i s 1, . . . , N,

denote СЁ grСЁ ti evaluated at t s вҗІ. By the delta method ЕҪ14.4.,

'n g ЕҪp. y g ЕҪ вҗІ .

d

X

X

NЕҪ0, вҗҫ diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІ вҗҫ. .

6

ЕҪ 14 .7.

The asymptotic variance equals

X

X2

2

2

вҗҫ diagЕҪ вҗІ . вҗҫ y ЕҪ вҗҫ вҗІ . s Гқ вҗІiвҗҫi y ЕҪ Гқ вҗІiвҗҫi . .

In Section 3.1.7 we used this formula to derive the large-sample variance of the sample log odds ratio.

14.1.5 Delta Method for Vector Function of Random Vector
The delta method generalizes further to a В®ector of functions of an asymptotically normal random vector. Let gЕҪt. s ЕҪ g1ЕҪt., . . . , gqЕҪt..X and let ЕҪСЁ grСЁ вҗӘ. denote the q = N Jacobian matrix for which the entry in row i and column j

DELTA METHOD

581

is СЁ giЕҪt.rСЁ tj evaluated at t s вҗӘ. Then,
'n gЕҪTn . y gЕҪ вҗӘ. d N 0, ЕҪ СЁ grСЁ вҗӘ. вҢә ЕҪ СЁ grСЁ вҗӘ.X .

6

ЕҪ 14 .8.

The rank of the limiting normal distribution equals the rank of the asymptotic covariance matrix.
Expression ЕҪ14.8. is useful for finding large-sample joint distributions. For instance, from ЕҪ14.6., ЕҪ14.7., and ЕҪ14.8., the asymptotic distribution of several functions of multinomial proportions has covariance matrix of the form
asymp. covГ„'n gЕҪp. y gЕҪ вҗІ . 4 s вҢҪ diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІX вҢҪX ,
where вҢҪ is the Jacobian ЕҪСЁ grСЁ вҗІ..

14.1.6 Joint Asymptotic Normality of Log Odds Ratios We illustrate formula ЕҪ14.8. by finding the joint asymptotic distribution of a set of log odds ratios in a contingency table. We use the log scale because convergence to normality is more rapid for it.
Let gЕҪ вҗІ. s logЕҪ вҗІ. denote the vector of natural logs of cell probabilities, for which
СЁ grСЁ вҗІ s diagЕҪ вҗІ . y1 .
The covariance of the asymptotic distribution of 'n wlogЕҪp. y logЕҪ вҗІ.x is

y1

X

y1

y1

X

diagЕҪ вҗІ . diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІ diagЕҪ вҗІ . s diagЕҪ вҗІ . y 11

where 1 is an N = 1 vector of 1 elements. For a q = N matrix of constants C, it follows that

'n C logЕҪp. y logЕҪ вҗІ .

d

y1 X

XX

N 0, C diagЕҪ вҗІ . C y C11 C .

6

ЕҪ 14 .9.

Now, suppose C logЕҪp. is a set of sample log odds ratios. Then, each row of C contains zeros except for two q1 elements and two y1 elements in the positions multiplied by the relevant elements of logЕҪp. to form the given log odds ratio. The second term in the covariance matrix in ЕҪ14.9. is then zero. If a particular odds ratio uses the cells numbered h, i, j, and k, the variance of the asymptotic distribution is
asymp. var 'n ЕҪsample log odds ratio. s вҗІy1 h q вҗІy1 i q вҗІy1 j q вҗІy1 k .

When two log odds ratios have no cells in common, their asymptotic covariance in the limiting normal distribution equals zero.

582

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

14.2 ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS OF ESTIMATORS OF MODEL PARAMETERS AND CELL PROBABILITIES

We now derive basic results of large-sample model-based inference for contingency tables. The delta method is the key tool. The derivations apply to a single multinomial distribution. They extend directly to products of multinomials, when the parameter space stays fixed as the sample size increases.
The observations are counts n s ЕҪ n1, . . . , nN .X in N cells of a contingency table. The asymptotics regard N as fixed and let n s Гқni в„ў Пұ. We assume that n s np has a multinomial distribution with probabilities вҗІ s ЕҪвҗІ 1, . . . , вҗІN .X. The model is
вҗІ s вҗІЕҪвҗӘ.,
where вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. denotes a function that relates вҗІ to a smaller number of parameters вҗӘ s ЕҪвҗӘ1, . . . , вҗӘq.X.
As вҗӘ ranges over its parameter space, вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. ranges over a subset of the space of вҗІ for N probabilities. Adding components to вҗӘ, the model becomes more complex and the space of вҗІ that satisfy the model is larger. We use вҗӘ and вҗІ to denote generic parameter and probability values, and вҗӘ0 s ЕҪвҗӘ10 , . . . , вҗӘq0 .X and вҗІ0 s ЕҪвҗІ 10 , . . . , вҗІ N 0 .X s вҗІ ЕҪвҗӘ0 . to denote true values for a particular application. When the model does not hold, no вҗӘ0 exists for which вҗІЕҪвҗӘ0. s вҗІ0; that is, вҗІ0 falls outside the subset of вҗІ values that is the range of вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. for the space of possible вҗӘ. We consider this case in Section 14.3.5.
We first derive the asymptotic distribution of the ML estimator ЛҶвҗӘ of вҗӘ.
We use that to derive the asymptotic distribution of the model-based ML
estimator вҗІЛҶ s вҗІЕҪЛҶвҗӘ. of вҗІ. The approach follows Rao ЕҪ1973, Sec. 5e. and
Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, Secs. 14.7 and 14.8.. The assumed regularity conditions are:
1. вҗӘ0 is not on the boundary of the parameter space. 2. All вҗІ i0 ) 0. 3. вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. has continuous first-order partial derivatives in a neighborhood
of вҗӘ0. 4. The Jacobian matrix ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ. has full rank q at вҗӘ0.
These conditions ensure that вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. is locally smooth and one-to-one at вҗӘ0 and Taylor series expansions exist in neighborhoods around вҗӘ0 and вҗІ0. When the Jacobian does not have full rank, often it does with reformulation of the model using fewer parameters.

14.2.1 Distribution of Model Parameter Estimator
The key to deriving the asymptotic distribution of ЛҶвҗӘ is to express ЛҶвҗӘ as a
linearized function of p. Then the delta method applies, using the asymptotic

ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS OF ESTIMATORS

583

normality of p. The linearization has two steps, first relating p to вҗІЛҶ , and then вҗІЛҶ to ЛҶвҗӘ.
The kernel of the multinomial log likelihood is

N

N

LЕҪ вҗӘ. s log ЕҒ вҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. ni s n Гқ pi logвҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. .

is1

is1

The likelihood equations are

s СЁ LЕҪ вҗӘ. n Гқ s pi СЁвҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. 0,

СЁвҗӘj

i вҗІ i ЕҪ вҗӘ. СЁвҗӘj

j s 1, . . . , q.

ЕҪ 14 .10.

These depend on the functional form вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. used in the model. Note that

Гқ s СЁвҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. СЁ Гқ вҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. s СЁ ЕҪ1. s 0.

i СЁвҗӘj

СЁвҗӘj i

СЁвҗӘj

ЕҪ 14 .11.

Let СЁвҗІirСЁвҗӘЛҶj represent СЁвҗІiЕҪвҗӘ.rСЁвҗӘj evaluated at ЛҶвҗӘ. Subtracting a common
term from both sides of the jth likelihood equation ЕҪ14.10.,

Гқ s nЕҪ pi y вҗІi0 . СЁвҗІi Гқ nЕҪ вҗІЛҶi , y вҗІi0 . СЁвҗІi

i

вҗІЛҶ i

СЁвҗӘЛҶj

i

вҗІЛҶ i

СЁвҗӘЛҶj

ЕҪ 14 .12.

since the first sum on the right-hand side equals zero from ЕҪ14.11..
Next we express вҗІЛҶ in terms of ЛҶвҗӘ using

вҗІЛҶi y вҗІi0 s Гқ ЕҪвҗӘЛҶk y вҗӘk0 . СЁвҗІi

k

СЁвҗӘ k

where СЁвҗІirСЁвҗӘk represents СЁвҗІirСЁвҗӘk evaluated at some point вҗӘ falling be-
tween ЛҶвҗӘ and вҗӘ0. Substitution of this into the right-hand side of ЕҪ14.12. and
division of both sides by 'n yields, for each j,

Еҫ / Гқ s 'n ЕҪ pi y вҗІi0 . СЁвҗІi Гқ 'n ЕҪвҗӘЛҶk y вҗӘk0 . Гқ 1 СЁвҗІi СЁвҗІi . ЕҪ14.13.

i

вҗІЛҶ i

СЁвҗӘЛҶj

k

i вҗІЛҶi СЁвҗӘЛҶj СЁвҗӘk

Some notation lets us express more simply the dependence of ЛҶвҗӘ on p. Let
A denote the N = q matrix having elements
ai j s вҗІ i0y1r2 СЁвҗІ i ЕҪ вҗӘ. .
СЁвҗӘj0

584

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

The matrix expression for A is

A s diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1r2 ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 . ,

ЕҪ 14 .14.

where ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0. denotes the Jacobian ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ. evaluated at вҗӘ0. As ЛҶвҗӘ

converges to вҗӘ0, the term in brackets on the right-hand side of ЕҪ14.13.

converges

to

the

element

in

row

j

and

column

k

of

X
AA.

As

ЛҶвҗӘ в„ў вҗӘ0,

the

set

of

equations ЕҪ14.13. has the form

X
A diagЕҪ

вҗІ 0 . y1r2

'n

ЕҪp

y

вҗІ0.

s

ЕҪAXA. 'n

ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ

y

вҗӘ0 .

q

op ЕҪ 1.

.

X
Since the Jacobian has full rank at вҗӘ0, AA is nonsingular. Thus,

'n

ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ

y

вҗӘ0 .

s

X y1 X
ЕҪAA. A diagЕҪ

вҗІ 0 . y1r2

'n

ЕҪp

y

вҗІ0.

q

op ЕҪ 1.

.

ЕҪ 14 .15.

Now, the asymptotic distribution of p determines that of ЛҶвҗӘ. From ЕҪ14.6.,
'n ЕҪp y вҗІ0. is asymptotically normal, with covariance matrix wdiagЕҪ вҗІ0. y вҗІ0 вҗІX0 x. By the delta method, 'n ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ0. is also asymptotically normal, with
asymptotic covariance matrix

X y1 X

y1r2

X

y1r2

X y1

ЕҪAA. A diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . = diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0 = diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . AЕҪAA. .

Using ЕҪ14.11. and ЕҪ14.14., the term subtracted in this expression disappears because

вҗІ0X diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1r2 A s вҗІ0X diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1r2 diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1r2 ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 .

Еҫ /X

X

X

s 1 ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 . s Гқ СЁвҗІirСЁ вҗӘ0 s 0 .

i

Thus, this asymptotic covariance expression for 'n ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ0. simplifies to
ЕҪAXA.y1 . In summary, this argument establishes the general result

'n ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ0 .

d

6

X y1
N 0, ЕҪAA. .

ЕҪ 14 .16.

The asymptotic covariance matrix of ЛҶвҗӘ depends on ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0. and hence on the function for modeling вҗІ in terms of вҗӘ. Let AЛҶ denote A evaluated at the ML estimate ЛҶвҗӘ. The estimated covariance matrix is

$

X y1

covЕҪ ЛҶвҗӘ. s ЕҪAЛҶAЛҶ. rn.

The asymptotic normality and covariance of ЛҶвҗӘ follows more simply from
general results for ML estimators. However, those results require stronger

ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS OF ESTIMATORS

585

regularity conditions ЕҪRao 1973, p. 364. than the ones assumed here. Suppose that observations are independent from f ЕҪy; вҗӘ., some probability mass func-
tion. The ML estimator ЛҶвҗӘ is efficient, in the sense that

'n ЕҪ ЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ. d NЕҪ0, Iy1 . ,

6

where I is the information matrix for a single observation. The ЕҪ j, k. element of I is

Еҫ / СЁ 2log f ЕҪy, вҗӘ.
yE СЁвҗӘjСЁвҗӘk

СЁ log f ЕҪy, вҗӘ. СЁ log f ЕҪy, вҗӘ.
s E СЁвҗӘj Рё СЁвҗӘk .

When f is the probability of a single observation having multinomial proba-
bilities Г„вҗІ 1ЕҪвҗӘ., . . . , вҗІN ЕҪвҗӘ.4, this element of I equals

N СЁ logЕҪвҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. . СЁ logЕҪвҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. .

N СЁвҗІiЕҪ вҗӘ. СЁвҗІiЕҪ вҗӘ.

Гқ

вҗІiЕҪвҗӘ. s Гқ

1 .

is1

СЁвҗӘj

СЁвҗӘ k

is1 СЁвҗӘj

СЁвҗӘk вҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ.

This

is

the

ЕҪ j,

k.

element

of

X
AA.

Thus

the

asymptotic

covariance

is

Iy1 s

ЕҪAXA.y1 .

For results of this section to apply, a ML estimator of вҗӘ must exist and be

a solution of the likelihood equations. This requires the following strong

identifiability condition: For every в‘Җ ) 0, there exists a вҗҰ ) 0 such that if
вҗӘ y вҗӘ0 ) в‘Җ , then вҗІ ЕҪ вҗӘ. y вҗІ0 ) вҗҰ. This condition implies a weaker one
that two вҗӘ values cannot have the same вҗІ value. When strong identifiability

and the other regularity conditions hold, the probability an ML estimator is a

root of the likelihood equations converges to 1 as n в„ў Пұ. That estimator has

the asymptotic properties given above of a solution of the likelihood equations. For proofs, see Birch ЕҪ1964a. and Rao ЕҪ1973, pp. 360бҺҗ362..

14.2.2 Asymptotic Distribution of Cell Probability Estimators
The asymptotic distribution of the model-based estimator вҗІЛҶ follows from the
Taylor-series expansion

вҗІЛҶ s вҗІ ЕҪ ЛҶвҗӘ. s вҗІ ЕҪ вҗӘ0 . q СЁ вҗІ ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ0 . q opЕҪ ny1r2 . .
СЁ вҗӘ0

ЕҪ 14 .17.

The size of the remainder term follows from ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ0. s OpЕҪ ny1r2 .. Now
вҗІЕҪвҗӘ0. s вҗІ0, and 'n ЕҪЛҶвҗӘ y вҗӘ0. is asymptotically normal with asymptotic co-

586

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

variance ЕҪAXA.y1. By the delta method,

d СЁ вҗІ X y1 СЁ вҗІ X

6

'n ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0 . N 0, ЕҪAA.

.

СЁ вҗӘ0

СЁ вҗӘ0

ЕҪ 14 .18.

When the model holds with вҗӘ having q - N y 1 elements, вҗІЛҶ s вҗІЕҪЛҶвҗӘ. is
more efficient than the sample proportion p for estimating вҗІ. More gener-
ally, for estimating a smooth function gЕҪ вҗІ. of вҗІ, gЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . has smaller asymp-
totic variance than gЕҪp.. We next derive this result, discussed in Section
6.4.5. The derivation deletes the Nth component from p and вҗІЛҶ , so their
covariance matrices are positive definite ЕҪProblem 14.16.. The Nth proportion is linearly dependent on the first N y 1 since they sum to 1. Let вҢә s
diagЕҪ вҗІ. y вҗІ вҗІX denote the ЕҪ N y 1. = ЕҪ N y 1. covariance matrix of 'n p.
The inverse of вҢә is

y1

y1

X

вҢә s diagЕҪ вҗІ . q 11вҗІN ,

ЕҪ 14 .19.

which can be verified by evaluating вҢә вҢәy1 and showing that it equals the
identity matrix. Let ЕҪСЁ grСЁ вҗІ0 . s ЕҪСЁ grСЁвҗІ 1, . . . , СЁ grСЁвҗІNy1 .X, evaluated at вҗІ s вҗІ0. By the
delta method,

Еҫ / Еҫ / asymp. var 'n gЕҪp. s

СЁg X СЁg

covЕҪ'n p.

s

СЁ вҗІ0

СЁ вҗІ0

СЁg X СЁg СЁ вҗІ0 вҢә СЁ вҗІ0

and
Asymp. var 'n g ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ .

Еҫ /СЁ g X Asymp. covЕҪ'n вҗІЛҶ . СЁ g

s СЁ вҗІ0

СЁ вҗІ0

Еҫ / Еҫ / СЁ g X СЁ вҗІ Asymp. covЕҪ'n ЛҶвҗӘ.
s СЁ вҗІ0 СЁ вҗӘ0

СЁвҗІ X СЁg СЁ вҗӘ0 СЁ вҗІ0 .

Using ЕҪ14.11. and ЕҪ14.19. yields

'ЛҶ

X y1

X

y1

y1

Asymp. covЕҪ n вҗӘ. s ЕҪAA. s ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 . diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 .

s ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 .X вҢәy1 ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 . y1 .

Since вҢә is positive definite and ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0. has rank q, вҢәy1 and wЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 .X вҢәy1 ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0.xy1 are also positive definite.

DISTRIBUTIONS OF RESIDUALS AND FIT STATISTICS

587

Еҫ / ВҪ Еҫ / Еҫ / 5 To show that asymp. varw'n gЕҪp.x G asymp. varw'n gЕҪвҗІЛҶ .x, we show that

СЁg X СЁвҗІ СЁ вҗІ0 вҢә y СЁ вҗӘ0

СЁвҗІ X

СЁ вҗІ y1

вҢәy1

СЁ вҗӘ0

СЁ вҗӘ0

СЁвҗІ X СЁ вҗӘ0

СЁg СЁ вҗІ0 G 0.

But this quadratic form is identical to
ЕҪY y BвҗЁ .X вҢәy1 ЕҪY y BвҗЁ .
where Y s вҢәЕҪСЁ grСЁ вҗІ0 ., B s ЕҪСЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 ., and вҗЁ s ЕҪBX вҢәy1 B.y1 BX вҢәy1 Y. The result then follows from the positive definiteness of вҢәy1.
This proof is based on one given by Altham ЕҪ1984.. Her proof uses standard properties of ML estimators. It applies whenever regularity conditions hold that guarantee those properties. The proof applies not only to categorical data but to any situation in which a model describes the dependence of a set of parameters вҗІ on some smaller set вҗӘ.

14.3 ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS OF RESIDUALS AND GOODNESS-OF-FIT STATISTICS
We next study the distribution of Pearson X 2 and likelihood-ratio G2 goodness-of-fit statistics for the multinomial model вҗІ s вҗІЕҪвҗӘ.. We first derive the asymptotic joint distribution of the sample proportions p and
model-based estimator вҗІЛҶ . This distribution determines large-sample distributions of statistics that depend on both p and вҗІЛҶ . For instance, it determines
the asymptotic joint distribution of the Pearson residuals, which compare p
with вҗІЛҶ . Deriving the large-sample chi-squared distribution for X 2, which is
the sum of squared Pearson residuals, is then straightforward. We also show that X 2 and G2 are asymptotically equivalent, when the model holds. Our
presentation borrows from Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, Chap 14., Cox ЕҪ1984., CramВҙer
ЕҪ1946, pp. 432бҺҗ433., and Rao ЕҪ1973, Sect. 6b..

14.3.1 Joint Asymptotic Normality of p and вҗІЛҶ

We first express the joint dependence of p and вҗІЛҶ on p, in order to show the joint asymptotic normality of p and вҗІЛҶ . Let

1r2

X y1 X

y1r2

D s diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . AЕҪAA. A diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . .

From ЕҪ14.15. and ЕҪ14.17.,

СЁвҗІ ЛҶ

y1r2

вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0 s ЕҪвҗӘ y вҗӘ0 . q o pЕҪ n .

СЁ вҗӘ0

s DЕҪp y вҗІ0 . q o p ЕҪ ny1r2 . .

588

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

Therefore,

Еҫ / Еҫ / 'n s p y вҗІ0 I 'n ЕҪp y вҗІ0 . q opЕҪ1. ,

вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0

D

where I is a N = N identity matrix. By the delta method,

Еҫ / 'n p yвҗІ0 вҗІЛҶ y вҗІ0

6

d NЕҪ0, вҢә*.

ЕҪ 14 .20.

where

ЕҫвҢә* s

diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X D diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X

/ diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X DX
D diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X DX .

ЕҪ 14 .21.

The two matrix blocks on the main diagonal of вҢә* are covЕҪ'n p. and asymp. covЕҪ'n вҗІЛҶ ., derived previously. The new information here is that asymp. covЕҪ'n p, 'n вҗІЛҶ . s wdiagЕҪ вҗІ0. y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X xDX.

14.3.2 Asymptotic Distribution of Pearson and Standardized Residuals
For cell counts Г„ ni4 the Pearson statistic is X 2 s Гқei2, where
ni y вҗ®ЛҶi 'n ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi .
ei s вҗ®ЛҶi1r2 s вҗІЛҶi1r2 .
We next derive the asymptotic distribution of e s ЕҪ e1, . . . , eN .X, which is a diagnostic measure of lack of fit. For Poisson models it is the Pearson residual. Dividing it by its standard error gives the standardized residual. The distribution of e is also helpful in deriving the distribution of X 2.
The residuals e are functions of p and вҗІЛҶ , which are jointly asymptotically
normal from ЕҪ14.20.. To use the delta method, we calculate
СЁ eirСЁ pi s 'n вҗІЛҶiy1r2 , СЁ eirСЁвҗІЛҶi s y'n ЕҪ pi q вҗІЛҶi . r2вҗІЛҶiy3r2
СЁ eirСЁ pj s СЁ eirСЁвҗІЛҶj s 0 for i / j.

That is,

s СЁ e 'n diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y1r2 and
СЁp

s y СЁ e ЕҪ 21 .'n diagЕҪp. q diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y3r2 .
СЁ вҗІЛҶ

ЕҪ 14 .22.

Evaluated at p s вҗІ0 and вҗІЛҶ s вҗІ0, these matrices equal 'n diagЕҪ вҗІ0.y1r2 and

y 'n diagЕҪ вҗІ0 .y1r2 .

Using

ЕҪ14.21.,

ЕҪ14.22.,

and

X 1r2
A вҗІ0 s 0

wwhich

follows

DISTRIBUTIONS OF RESIDUALS AND FIT STATISTICS

from ЕҪ14.11.x, the delta method implies that

d

6

1r2 1r2X

X y1 X

e NЕҪ0, I y вҗІ0 вҗІ0 y AЕҪAA. A . .

589
ЕҪ 14 .23.

The limiting distribution has form NЕҪ0, I y Hat., where Hat is the hat matrix ЕҪSection 4.5.5.. Although asymptotically normal, e behaves less variably than standard normal random variables. The standardized Pearson residual ЕҪHaberman 1973a. divides e by its estimated standard error. This statistic, which is asymptotically standard normal, equals

ei
1 y вҗІЛҶi y ri ГқjГқk s ЕҪ1rвҗІЛҶi . Еҫ СЁвҗІirСЁвҗӘЛҶj / ЕҪ СЁвҗІirСЁвҗӘЛҶk . ЛҶВ® jk 1r2 ,

ЕҪ 14 .24.

' where ЛҶВ® jk denotes the element in row j and column k of ЕҪAЛҶXAЛҶ.y1. The
denominator of ri is 1 y ЛҶhi , where the leverage ЛҶhi for observation i
estimates the ith diagonal element of the hat matrix. This simplifies to ЕҪ3.13. for testing independence in two-way tables.

14.3.3 Asymptotic Distribution of Pearson Statistic
The proof that the Pearson X 2 statistic has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution uses the following relationship between normal and chi-squared distributions ЕҪRao 1973, p. 188.:

Let X be multivariate normal with mean вҗҜ and covariance matrix B. A necessary and sufficient condition for ЕҪX y вҗҜ.XCЕҪX y вҗҜ. to have a chi-squared distribution is BCBCB s BCB. The degrees of freedom equal the rank of CB.

When B is nonsingular, the condition simplifies to CBC s C. The Pearson statistic relates to e by X 2 s eX e, so we apply this result by
identifying X with e, вҗҜ s 0, C s I, and B s I y вҗІ1r2 0 вҗІ1r2X 0 y AЕҪAXA.y1AX4. Since C s I, the condition for ЕҪX y вҗҜX .CЕҪX y вҗҜ. s Г„eX e4 s X 2 to have a

chi-squared distribution simplifies to BBB s BB. A direct computation using

X 1r2
A вҗІ0 s 0

shows

that

B

is

idempotent,

so

the

condition

holds.

Since

e

is

asymptotically multivariate normal, X 2 is asymptotically chi-squared.

For symmetric idempotent matrices, the rank equals the trace. The trace of I is N; the trace of вҗІ01r2 вҗІ01r2X equals the trace of вҗІ01r2X вҗІ01r2 s ГқвҗІ i0 s 1, which is 1; the trace of AЕҪAXA.y1AX equals the trace of ЕҪAXA.y1 ЕҪAXA. s identity

matrix of size q = q, which is q. Thus, the rank of B s CB is N y q y 1, and

the asymptotic chi-squared distribution has df s N y q y1. This result, due to Fisher ЕҪ1922., is remarkably simple. When the sample

size is large, the distribution of X 2 does not depend on вҗІ0 or the model form. It depends only on the difference between the dimension of вҗІ, which

is N y 1, and the dimension of вҗӘ. With q s 0 parameters, X 2 is PearsonвҖҷs

590

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

ЕҪ1900. statistic ЕҪ1.15. for testing that multinomial probabilities equal certain specified values, and df s N y 1 as Pearson claimed. Watson ЕҪ1959. showed that the same result holds for the asymptotic conditional distribution, given a sufficient statistic for nuisance parameters.

14.3.4 Asymptotic Distribution of Likelihood-Ratio Statistic

When the model holds, the likelihood-ratio statistic G2 is asymptotically

equivalent to X 2 as n в„ў Пұ. To show this, we express

Еҫ / G2 s 2 Гқ nilog s ni 2 n Гқ pilog 1 q pi y вҗІЛҶi

i

вҗ®ЛҶ i

i

вҗІЛҶ i

and apply the expansion

logЕҪ1 q x . s x y x 2r2 q x 3r3 y РёРёРё for x - 1.

We identify x with ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi.rвҗІЛҶi, which converges in probability to 0 when
the model holds. For large n,

G2 s 2 n Гқ вҗІЛҶi q ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi .
i

Еҫ / pi y вҗІЛҶi

1 ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi . 2

y

вҗІЛҶ i

2

вҗІЛҶi2 q РёРёРё

Еҫ /1 ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi . 2 ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi . 3 2

s 2 n Гқ ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi . y

q

q Op ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi .

i

2

вҗІЛҶ i

вҗІЛҶ i

ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi . 2

y3r2

2

y1r2

2

snГқ

q 2 nOpЕҪ n . s X q OpЕҪ n . s X q opЕҪ1. ,

i

вҗІЛҶ i

since ГқЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi. s 0 and ЕҪ pi y вҗІЛҶi. s ЕҪ pi y вҗІi. y ЕҪвҗІЛҶi y вҗІi., both of which
are OpЕҪ ny1r2 .. Thus, when the model holds, the difference between X 2 and G2 converges in probability to 0. As a consequence, G2, like X 2, has an
asymptotic chi-squared distribution with df s N y q y 1.
The parameter value that maximizes the likelihood is the one that minimizes G2. To show this, we let

G2 ЕҪ вҗІ ; p. s 2 n Гқ pi logЕҪ pirвҗІi . .

The kernel of the multinomial log likelihood is
LЕҪ вҗӘ. s n Гқ pi logвҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ.
Еҫ / s yn Гқ pi log q pi n Гқ pi log pi вҗІiЕҪвҗӘ.
s y 1 G2 ЕҪ вҗІ ЕҪ вҗӘ. ; p. q n Гқ pi log pi .
2

DISTRIBUTIONS OF RESIDUALS AND FIT STATISTICS

591

The second term in the last expression does not depend on вҗӘ, so maximizing LЕҪвҗӘ. is equivalent to minimizing G2 with respect to вҗӘ.
A fundamental result for G2 concerns comparisons of nested models. Suppose that model M0 is a special case of model M1. Let q0 and q1 denote
the numbers of parameters in the two models. Let Г„вҗІЛҶ 0i4 and Г„вҗІЛҶ 1i4 denote ML
estimators of cell probabilities for the two models. Then
G2 ЕҪ M0 . y G2 ЕҪ M1 . s 2 n Гқ pi logЕҪвҗІЛҶ 1irвҗІЛҶ 0i .
has the form of y2ЕҪlog likelihood ratio. for testing that M0 holds against the alternative that M1 holds. Theory for likelihood-ratio tests suggests that when the simpler model holds, the asymptotic distribution of G2ЕҪ M0. y G2ЕҪ M1. is chi-squared with q1 y q2 degrees of freedom. For details, see Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, pp. 525бҺҗ526., Haberman ЕҪ1974a, p. 108., and Rao ЕҪ1973, pp. 418бҺҗ419.. The statistic X 2ЕҪ M0 < M1. defined in ЕҪ9.4. is a quadratic approximation for the G2 difference. Haberman ЕҪ1977a. noted that these tests can perform well even for large, sparse tables, as long as q1 y q0 is small compared to the sample size and no expected frequency has larger order of magnitude than the others.

14.3.5 Asymptotic Noncentral Distributions

Results in this chapter assume that a certain parametric model holds. In practice, any unsaturated model almost surely does not hold perfectly, so one might question the scope of these results. This is not problematic if we regard models merely as convenient approximations for reality. For instance, the
ML estimator ЛҶвҗӘ converges to a value вҗӘ0 that describes the best fit of the
chosen model to reality. In this sense, inferences for вҗӘ give us information about a useful approximation for reality. Similarly, model-based inferences about cell probabilities are inconsistent for the true probabilities when the model does not hold; nevertheless, those inferences are consistent for describing a useful smoothing of reality.
For goodness-of-fit statistics, a relevant distinction exists between limiting behavior when the model holds and when it does not hold. When the model holds, weвҖҷve seen X 2 and G2 have a limiting chi-squared distribution, and the difference between them disappears as n increases. When the model does not hold, X 2 and G2 tend to grow unboundedly as n increases, and
X 2 y G2 need not go to zero. One method for obtaining proper limiting distributions considers a sequence of situations вҗІn for which the lack of fit diminishes as n increases. Specifically, the model is вҗІ s fЕҪвҗӘ., but in reality

вҗІn s fЕҪ вҗӘ. q вҗҰr'n .

ЕҪ 14 .25.

The best fit of the model to the population has ith probability equal to fiЕҪвҗӘ.,
but the true value differs from that by вҗҰir'n .
For this representation, Mitra ЕҪ1958. showed that the Pearson X 2 has a limiting noncentral chi-squared distribution, with df s N y q y 1 and non-

592

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

centrality parameter

n
вҗӯsnГқ
is1

вҗІni y fi ЕҪ вҗӘ. 2 fiЕҪвҗӘ. .

This has the form of X 2, with the sample values pi and вҗІЛҶi replaced by
population values вҗІni and fiЕҪвҗӘ.. Similarly, the noncentrality of the likelihood-ratio statistic has the form of G2, with the same substitution. Haberman ЕҪ1974a, pp. 109бҺҗ112. showed that under certain conditions G2 and X 2 have the same limiting distribution; that is, their noncentrality values converge to a common value as n в„ў Пұ.
Representation ЕҪ14.25. means that for large n, the noncentral chi-squared
approximation is valid when the model is just barely incorrect. In practice, it is often reasonable to adopt ЕҪ14.25. for fixed, finite n to approximate the distribution of X 2, even though ЕҪ14.25. would not be plausible as we obtain
more data. The alternative representation

вҗІ s fЕҪвҗӘ. q вҗҰ

ЕҪ 14 .26.

in which вҗІ differs from fЕҪвҗӘ. by a fixed amount as n в„ў Пұ may seem more natural. In fact, this is more appropriate than ЕҪ14.25. for proving the test to be consistent ЕҪi.e., for convergence to 1 of the probability of rejecting the hypothesis that the model holds.. For ЕҪ14.26., however, the noncentrality parameter вҗӯ grows unboundedly as n в„ў Пұ, and a proper limiting distribution does not result for X 2 and G2.
When the model holds, вҗҰ s 0 in either representation ЕҪ14.25. or ЕҪ14.26.. That is, fЕҪвҗӘ. s вҗІЕҪвҗӘ., вҗӯ s 0, and the results in Sections 14.3.3 and 14.3.4
apply.

14.4 ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS FOR LOGIT r LOGLINEAR MODELS

For loglinear models, formulas in Section 8.6 for the asymptotic covariance
matrices of ЛҶвҗӘ and вҗІЛҶ are special cases of ones derived in Section 14.2. We
present these for the multinomial form of the models, which relates directly to that section. Then we discuss the connection to Poisson loglinear models.
To constrain probabilities to sum to 1, we express loglinear models for multinomial sampling as

вҗІ s expЕҪXвҗӘ. r 1XexpЕҪXвҗӘ.

ЕҪ 14 .27.

where

X

is

a

model

matrix

and

X
1

s

ЕҪ1,

.

.

.

,

1..

Letting

xi

denote

row

i

of

X,

вҗІi s вҗІi ЕҪ вҗӘ. s expЕҪx iвҗӘ. . Гқk expЕҪx kвҗӘ.

ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS FOR LOGIT r LOGLINEAR MODELS

593

14.4.1 Asymptotic Covariance Matrices

A model affects covariance matrices through the Jacobian. Since

СЁвҗІi s
СЁвҗӘj

Гқk expЕҪx kвҗӘ.

expЕҪx iвҗӘ. xi j y expЕҪx iвҗӘ. Гқk expЕҪx kвҗӘ. 2

s вҗІi xi j y вҗІi Гқ xk jвҗІ k ,
k

Гқk xk j expЕҪx kвҗӘ.

the matrix of these elements has the form

СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ s diagЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗІ вҗІX X.

Using this with ЕҪ14.14. and ЕҪ14.16., the information matrix at вҗӘ0 is

X

X

y1

AA s ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 . diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . ЕҪ СЁ вҗІrСЁ вҗӘ0 .

s XX diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X X diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1 diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X X

s XX diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X X.

Thus, for multinomial loglinear models, ЛҶвҗӘ is asymptotically normally
distributed with estimated covariance matrix

$ЛҶ X

X

y1

covЕҪ вҗӘ. s Г„X diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶ X4 rn.

ЕҪ 14 .28.

Similarly, from ЕҪ14.23. the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of вҗІЛҶ is
cov $ЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . s diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶX XГ„XX diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶX X4y1
=XX diagЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . y вҗІЛҶ вҗІЛҶX n.

From ЕҪ14.23., the Pearson residuals e are asymptotically normal with

1r2 1r2 X

X y1 X

asymp. covЕҪe. s I y вҗІ0 ЕҪ вҗІ0 . y AЕҪAA. A

s I y вҗІ01r2 ЕҪ вҗІ01r2 .X y diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1r2 diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X X

=Г„XX diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X X4y1XX

= diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y вҗІ0 вҗІ0X diagЕҪ вҗІ0 . y1r2 .

14.4.2 Connection with Poisson Loglinear Models

This book expressed loglinear models in terms of Poisson expected cell frequencies вҗ® s ЕҪвҗ®1, . . . , вҗ®N .X, using formulas of the form

log вҗ® s X aвҗӘa .

ЕҪ 14 .29.

594

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

The model matrix X a and parameter vector вҗӘa in this formula are slightly different from X and вҗӘ in multinomial model ЕҪ14.27.. The Poisson expression ЕҪ14.29. does not have constraints on вҗ®. For multinomial model ЕҪ14.27., Гқi вҗ®i s n is fixed, and вҗІ s вҗ®rn satisfies
log вҗ® s log nвҗІ s XвҗӘ q log n y logЕҪ 1XexpЕҪXвҗӘ. . 1
s XвҗӘ q 1вҗ® where вҗ® s log n y logЕҪ1XexpЕҪXвҗӘ..x. In other words, multinomial model ЕҪ14.27. implies Poisson model ЕҪ14.29. with
X a s w1: Xx and вҗӘa s ЕҪ вҗ®, вҗӘX .X .

The columns of X in the multinomial representation must be linearly independent of 1; that is, the parameter вҗ®, which relates to the total sample size, does not appear in вҗӘ. The dimension of вҗӘ is 1 less than the number of parameters reported in this text for Poisson loglinear models. For instance, for the saturated model, вҗӘ has N y 1 elements for the multinomial representation, reflecting the sole constraint on вҗІ of ГқвҗІi s 1.

NOTES
Section 14.1: Delta Method

14.1. For detailed discussion of large-sample theory including the delta method, see Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, Chap. 14. and Sen and Singer ЕҪ1993..

14.2.

In applying the delta method to a function g of an asymptotically normal random vector Tn, suppose that the first-order, . . . , ЕҪ a y 1.st-order differentials of the function are zero at вҗӘ, but the ath-order differential is nonzero. A generalization of the delta method implies that nar2 w gЕҪTn. y gЕҪвҗӘ.x has limiting distribution involving products of

order a of components of a normal random vector. When a s 2, the limiting distribu-

tion is a quadratic form in a multivariate normal vector, which often relates to a

chi-squared distribution; in the univariate case, it is

вҗҙ 2ЕҪ gYЕҪвҗӘ ..r2 times a

вҗ№2
1

variable

ЕҪCasella and Berger 2001, p. 244..

Resampling methods such as the jackknife and the bootstrap are alternative tools

for estimating standard errors and obtaining confidence intervals. They can be helpful

when use of the delta method is questionableбҺҸfor instance, for small samples, highly sparse data, or complex sampling designs. For details, see Davison and Hinkley ЕҪ1997., Fay ЕҪ1985., Parr and Tolley ЕҪ1982., and Simonoff ЕҪ1986..

Section 14.3: Asymptotic Distributions of Residuals and Goodness-of-Fit Statistics

14.3.

If Y is Poisson with EЕҪY . s вҗ®, then for large вҗ® the delta method implies Y 1r2 is approximately normal with standard deviation 21 . This motivates an alternative good-
ness-of-fit statistic, the FreemanбҺҗTukey statistic, FT s 4ГқЕҪ'y i y 'вҗ®ЛҶi .2. When the
model holds, FT y X 2 is also opЕҪ1. as n в„ў Пұ. See Bishop et al. ЕҪ1975, p. 514. for details.

PROBLEMS

595

14.4.

Results of this chapter do not apply when the number of cells N grows as n в„ў Пұ, or when different expected frequencies grow at different rates. Haberman ЕҪ1988. showed the consistency of X 2 breaks down with non-standard asymptotics. Drost et al. ЕҪ1989. showed noncentral approximations using other sequences of alternatives than the local and fixed ones ЕҪ14.25. and ЕҪ14.26..

PROBLEMS

14.1 Explain why: a. If c ) 0, nyc s oЕҪ1. as n в„ў Пұ. b. If c / 0, czn has the same order as zn; that is, oЕҪczn. is equivalent to oЕҪ zn. and OЕҪczn. is equivalent to OЕҪ zn.. c. oЕҪ yn.oЕҪ zn. s oЕҪ yn zn., OЕҪ yn.OЕҪ zn. s OЕҪ yn zn., oЕҪ yn.OЕҪ zn. s oЕҪ yn zn..
14.2 If X 2 has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with fixed df as n в„ў Пұ, then explain why X 2rn s opЕҪ1..
14.3 a. Use TchebychevвҖҷs inequality to show that if EЕҪ Xn. s вҗ®n and varЕҪ Xn. s вҗҙn2 - Пұ, then ЕҪ Xn y вҗ®n. s OpЕҪвҗҙn..
b. Suppose that Y1, . . . , Yn are independent with EЕҪYi. s вҗ® and varЕҪYi. s вҗҙ 2 for i s 1, . . . , n. Let Yn s ЕҪГқiYi.rn. Apply part ЕҪa. to show that Yn y вҗ® s OpЕҪ ny1r2 ..
14.4 Let Y be a Poisson random variable with mean вҗ®. a. For a constant c ) 0, show that

E logЕҪ Y q c.

s

log

вҗ®

q

ЕҪc

y

1 2

.

rвҗ®

q

O ЕҪ вҗ®y2

.

ЕҪ Hint: Note that logЕҪY q c. s log вҗ® q logw1 q ЕҪY q c y вҗ®.rвҗ®x..

b. Cell counts in a 2 = 2 table are independent Poisson random variables. Use part ЕҪa. to argue that to reduce bias in estimating

the log odds ratio, a sensible estimator is the sample log odds ratio

after

adding

1 2

to

each

cell.

14.5 Let p denote the sample proportion for n independent Bernoulli trials. Find the asymptotic distribution of the estimator w pЕҪ1 y p.x1r2 of the standard deviation. What happens when вҗІ s 0.5?

14.6 Suppose that Tn has a Poisson distribution with mean вҗӯ s nвҗ®, for fixed вҗ® ) 0. For large n, show that the distribution of log Tn is approximately normal with mean logЕҪ вҗӯ. and variance вҗӯy1. w Hint: By

596

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

the central limit theorem, Tnrn is approximately NЕҪвҗ®, вҗ®rn. for large n.x
14.7 a. Refer to Problem 14.6. If Tn is Poisson, show 'Tn has asymptotic
variance 41 . b. For a binomial sample with n trials and sample proportion p,
show the asymptotic variance of siny1ЕҪ'p . is 1r4n. wThis transfor-
mation and the one in part ЕҪa. are В®ariance stabilizing, producing variates with asymptotic variances that are the same for all values of the parameter. Traditionally, these transformations were employed to make ordinary least squares applicable to count data. See Cochran 1940 for discussion and ML analyses.x
14.8 For a multinomial ЕҪ n, Г„вҗІi4. distribution, show the correlation between pi and pj is ywвҗІiвҗІjrЕҪ1 y вҗІi.ЕҪ1 y вҗІj.x1r2 . What does this equal when вҗІi s 1 y вҗІj and вҗІ k s 0 for k / i, j?

14.9 An animal population has N species, with population proportion вҗІi of species i. SimpsonвҖҷs index of ecological diВ®ersity ЕҪSimpson 1949. is IЕҪ вҗІ. s 1 y ГқвҗІi2. wRao ЕҪ1982. surveyed diversity measures.x

a. Two animals are randomly chosen from the population, with replacement. Show IЕҪ вҗІ. is the probability they are different

species.

ВҪ Еҫ / 5 b. For proportions p for a random sample, show that the estimated asymptotic standard error of IЕҪp. is

1r2 2
2 Гқ pi3 y Гқ pi2 n .

i

i

14.10

Let Г„Yi4 be independent Poisson random variables. Show by the delta method that the estimated asymptotic variance of Гқai logЕҪYi. is Гқa2i ryi. wThis formula applies to ML estimators of parameters for the saturated loglinear model, which are contrasts of Г„logЕҪ yi.4. Formula ЕҪ14.9. yields the asymptotic covariance structure of such estimators; see Lee ЕҪ1977..x

14.11 Assuming two independent binomial samples, derive the asymptotic standard error of the log relative risk ЕҪSection 3.1.4..

14.12

Refer to Problem 3.27. The sample size may need to be quite large

for the sampling distribution of вҗҘЛҶ to be approximately normal,

especially if

<вҗҘ<

is large. The Fisher-type transform вҗ°ЛҶs

1 2

logwЕҪ1

q

вҗҘЛҶ

.r

ЕҪ1 y вҗҘЛҶ.x ЕҪAgresti 1984, pp. 166бҺҗ167, 177; OвҖҷGorman and Woolson

1988. converges more quickly to normality.

PROBLEMS

597

a. Show that the asymptotic variance of вҗ°ЛҶ equals the asymptotic variance of вҗҘЛҶ multiplied by ЕҪ1 y вҗҘ 2 .y2.

b. Explain how to construct a confidence interval for вҗ° and use it to

obtain one for вҗҘ .

c.

Show that

вҗ°ЛҶs

1 2

logЕҪCrD..

For

2

=

2

tables,

show

that

this

is

half

the log odds ratio.

14.13

Let вҗҫ 2ЕҪT. s ГқiЕҪTi y вҗІ i0 .2rвҗІi0. Then вҗҫ 2ЕҪp. s X 2rn, where X 2 is the Pearson statistic ЕҪ1.15. for testing H0: вҗІi s вҗІi0, i s 1, . . . , N, and nвҗҫ 2ЕҪ вҗІ. is the noncentrality for that test when вҗІ is the true value. Under H0, why does the delta method not yield an asymptotic normal distribution for вҗҫ 2ЕҪp.? ЕҪSee Note 14.2..

14.14

In an I = J contingency table, let вҗӘi j denote local odds ratio ЕҪ2.10.,
and let вҗӘЛҶi j denote its sample value.
a. Show that asymp. covЕҪ'n log вҗӘЛҶi j, 'n log вҗӘЛҶiq1, j. s ywвҗІy1 iq1, j q
вҗІy1 iq1, jq1 x.
b. Show that asymp. covЕҪ'n log вҗӘЛҶi j, 'n log вҗӘЛҶiq1, jq1 . s вҗІy1 iq1, jq1.
c. When вҗӘЛҶi j and вҗӘЛҶhk use mutually exclusive sets of cells, show that
asymp. covЕҪ'n log вҗӘЛҶi j, 'n log вҗӘЛҶhk . s 0.
d. State the asymptotic distribution of log вҗӘЛҶi j.

14.15

For loglinear model ЕҪ XY, XZ, YZ., ML estimates of Г„вҗ®i jk4 and hence the X 2 and G2 statistics are not direct. Alternative approaches may yield direct analyses. For 2 = 2 = 2 tables, find a statistic for testing the hypothesis of no three-factor interaction, using the delta method
with the asymptotic normality of logвҗӘЛҶ111, where

вҗӘЛҶ111 s p111 p221 . rp121 p211
p112 p222rp122 p212

14.16

Refer to Section 14.2.2, with вҢә s diagЕҪ вҗІ. y вҗІ вҗІX the covariance
matrix of 'n ЕҪ p1, . . . , pNy1 .X. Let

ВҪZ s ci 0

with probability вҗІi , with probability вҗІN

i s 1, . . . , N y 1

and let c s ЕҪc1, . . . , cNy1 .X. a. Show that EЕҪ Z. s cX вҗІ, EЕҪ Z 2 . s cXdiagЕҪ вҗІ.c, and varЕҪ Z. s cX вҢә c.
b. Suppose that at least one ci / 0, and all вҗІi ) 0. Show varЕҪ Z. ) 0, and deduce that вҢә is positive definite.

598

ASYMPTOTIC THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

c. If вҗІ s ЕҪвҗІ 1, . . . , вҗІN .X, so вҢә is N = N, prove that вҢә is not positive definite.

14.17

Consider the model for a 2 = 2 table, вҗІ 11 s вҗӘ 2, вҗІ 12 s вҗІ 21 s вҗӘ ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ ., вҗІ 22 s ЕҪ1 y вҗӘ .2, where вҗӘ is unknown ЕҪProblems 3.31 and 10.34.. a. Find the matrix A in ЕҪ14.14. for this model.
b. Use A to obtain the asymptotic variance of вҗӘЛҶ. ЕҪAs a check, it is
simple to find it directly using the inverse of yEСЁ 2LrСЁвҗӘ 2, where L is the log likelihood.. For which вҗӘ value is the variance maxi-
mized? What is the distribution of вҗӘЛҶ if вҗӘ s 0 or вҗӘ s 1?
c. Find the asymptotic covariance matrix of 'n вҗІЛҶ .
d. Find df for testing fit using X 2.

14.18 Refer to the model for the calf data in Section 1.5.6. Obtain the
asymptotic variance of вҗІЛҶ .

14.19 Justify the use of estimated asymptotic covariance matrices. For
instance, for large samples, why is AЛҶРҲAЛҶ close to AРҲA?
14.20 Cell counts Г„Yi4 are independent Poisson random variables, with вҗ®i s EЕҪYi.. Consider the Poisson loglinear model

log вҗ® s X aвҗӘa , where вҗ® s ЕҪ вҗ®1 , . . . , вҗ®N . .

Using arguments similar to those in Section 14.2, show that the
large-sample covariance matrix of ЛҶвҗӘa can be estimated by wXXadiagЕҪвҗ®ЛҶ .X a xy1, where вҗ®ЛҶ is the ML estimator of вҗ®.

14.21

For a given set of parameter constraints, show that weak identifiability conditions hold for the independence loglinear model for a two-way table; that is, when two values for вҗӘ give the same вҗІ, those parameter vectors must be identical.

14.22

Use the delta method, with derivatives ЕҪ14.22., to derive the asymptotic covariance matrix in ЕҪ14.23. for residuals. Show that this matrix is idempotent.

14.23

In some situations, X 2 and G2 take very similar values. Explain the joint influence on this event of ЕҪa. whether the model holds, ЕҪb. whether the sample size n is large, and ЕҪc. whether the number of cells N is large.

PROBLEMS

599

14.24 14.25

Show X and вҗӘ in multinomial representation ЕҪ14.27. for the independence model for an I = J table. By contrast, show X a for the corresponding Poisson loglinear model ЕҪ14.29..
$
Using ЕҪ14.18. and ЕҪ14.28., derive the asymptotic covЕҪ вҗІЛҶ . for a multino-
mial loglinear model.

14.26

Consider the ML estimator вҗІЛҶi j s piqpqj of вҗІi j for the independence
model, when that model does not hold. Show that EЕҪ piqpqj . s
вҗІiqвҗІqj ЕҪ n y 1.rn q вҗІi jrn. To what does вҗІЛҶi j converge as n in-
creases?

14.27

6

Let вҗЁ denote a generic measure of association. For K independent
multinomial samples of sizes Г„nk4, suppose that 'nk ЕҪ вҗЁЛҶk y вҗЁk .
d NЕҪ0, вҗҙk2 . as nk в„ў Пұ. A summary measure is
Гқk ЕҪ nkrвҗҙЛҶk2 . вҗЁЛҶk вҗЁ s Гқk ЕҪ nkrвҗҙЛҶk2 . .

a. Show that Гқk zk2 s V q w вҗЁ 2rвҗҙЛҶ 2ЕҪ вҗЁ .x, where

nk Еҫ вҗЁЛҶk y вҗЁ /2

Vs Гқ

2

,

k

вҗҙЛҶk

n1r2вҗЁЛҶ

kk

zk s

,

вҗҙЛҶk

Еҫ / 2 nk y1
вҗҙЛҶ ЕҪ вҗЁ . s Гқ 2 .
k вҗҙЛҶk

b. Suppose that n в„ў Пұ with nkrn в„ў вҗіk ) 0, k s 1, . . . , K. State the asymptotic chi-squared distribution for each component in the partitioning in part ЕҪa.. Indicate the hypothesis that each tests.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 15
Alternative Estimation Theory for Parametric Models
In this book we have used the maximum likelihood ЕҪML. approach to inference. This is by far the most common approach for categorical data analysis. Other paradigms have been used, however. In this chapter we discuss some of them. These methods have similar asymptotic properties as maximum likelihood, so the large-sample theory of Chapter 14 applies also to them.
In Section 15.1 we discuss weighted least squares for fitting models for categorical data. This and related quasi-likelihood methods introduced in Sections 4.7 and 11.4 are sometimes simpler to apply than ML.
The Bayesian paradigm is increasingly popular as computations become easier to implement. A full discussion of modern developments with this approach is beyond our scope, but in Section 15.2 we present Bayesian methods of estimating cell probabilities in a contingency table. Four other methods of estimation for categorical data are described in the final section.
15.1 WEIGHTED LEAST SQUARES FOR CATEGORICAL DATA Weighted least squares ЕҪWLS. is an extension of ordinary least squares that permits responses to be correlated and to have nonconstant variance. Familiarity with the WLS method is useful because:
1. WLS computations have a standard form that is simple to apply for a wide variety of models.
2. Algorithms for calculating ML estimates often consist of iterative use of WLS. An example is the Fisher scoring method for generalized linear models ЕҪSection 4.6.3..
3. When the model holds, WLS and ML estimators are asymptotically equivalent, both falling in the class of best asymptotically normal ЕҪBAN.
600

WEIGHTED LEAST SQUARES FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

601

estimators. For large samples, the estimators are approximately normally distributed around the parameter value, and the ratio of their variances converges to 1.
Grizzle, Starmer, and Koch ЕҪ1969. popularized WLS for categorical data analyses. In honor of them, WLS for such analyses is often called the GSK method. This section summarizes the ingredients of this approach.

15.1.1 Notation and Preliminaries for WLS Approach

For a response variable Y with J categories, consider multinomial samples of sizes n1, . . . , nI at I levels of an explanatory variable or combinations of levels of several explanatory variables. Let вҗІ s ЕҪ вҗІ1X , . . . , вҗІIX .X, where

вҗІi s ЕҪвҗІ 1 < i , вҗІ 2 < i , . . . , вҗІJ < i .X

with

ГқвҗІj < i s 1
j

denotes the conditional distribution of Y at level i. Let p denote corresponding sample proportions, with V their IJ = IJ covariance matrix. When the I samples are independent,

V1

0

V2 Vs ...

0

VI

From Section 14.1.4, the covariance matrix of 'ni pi is

вҗІ1 < iЕҪ1 y вҗІ1 < i.

yвҗІ 1 < iвҗІ 2 < i

РёРёРё

yвҗІ 1 < iвҗІ J < i

niVi s

yвҗІ 2 < iвҗІ 1 < i . . .

вҗІ 2 < i ЕҪ1 y вҗІ 2 < i . РёРёРё
. . .

yвҗІ 2 < iвҗІ J < i

.

.

.

.

yвҗІ J < iвҗІ 1 < i

yвҗІ J < iвҗІ 2 < i

РёРёРё вҗІJ < i ЕҪ1 y вҗІJ < i .

Each set of proportions has ЕҪ J y 1. linearly independent elements. Let F be a vector of u F IЕҪ J y 1. response functions
FЕҪ вҗІ . s F1ЕҪ вҗІ . , . . . , FuЕҪ вҗІ . X .

The WLS approach applies to linear models for F of form
FЕҪ вҗІ. s XвҗӨ,

ЕҪ 15 .1.

602

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

where вҗӨ is a q = 1 vector of parameters and X is a u = q model matrix of known constants having rank q. From Section 8.5.4, loglinear and logit response functions are special cases of FЕҪ вҗІ. s C logЕҪAвҗІ. for certain matrices C and A.
Let FЕҪp. denote the sample response functions. We assume that F has continuous second-order partial derivatives in an open region containing вҗІ. This assumption enables the delta method to determine the large-sample normal distribution for FЕҪp.. The asymptotic covariance matrix of FЕҪp. depends on the u = IJ matrix
СЁ Fk ЕҪ вҗІ .
Qs СЁвҗІj < i
for k s 1, . . . , u and all IJ combinations ЕҪi, j.. Linear response models have response functions of form FЕҪ вҗІ. s AвҗІ for a matrix of known constants A, in which case Q s A. For the generalized loglinear model FЕҪ вҗІ. s C logЕҪAвҗІ. ЕҪrecall Sections 8.5.4 and 11.2.5., Q s CwdiagЕҪAвҗІ.xy1A. wSee Magnus and Neudecker 1988 for matrix differential calculus.x By the multivariate delta method ЕҪSection 14.1.5., the asymptotic covariance matrix of FЕҪp. is
VF s QVQX .
Let VЛҶF denote the sample version of VF , substituting sample proportions in Q
and V. For subsequent formulas, this matrix must be nonsingular.

15.1.2 Inference Using the WLS Approach to Model Fitting For the general model ЕҪ15.1., the WLS estimate of вҗӨ is

b

s

ЕҪXX

VЛҶy1 F

X. X y1 X

VЛҶy1
F

FЕҪp.

.

This is the вҗӨ value that minimizes the quadratic form

FЕҪp. y XвҗӨ

XVЛҶy1
F

FЕҪp. y XвҗӨ

.

The ordinary least squares estimate, for uncorrelated responses with constant
variance, results when VЛҶF is a constant multiple of the identity matrix.
The WLS estimator has an asymptotic multivariate normal distribution, with estimated covariance matrix
$ X ЛҶy1 y1
covЕҪb. s ЕҪX VF X. .
The normal distribution improves as the sample size increases and FЕҪp. is more nearly normally distributed.

WEIGHTED LEAST SQUARES FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

603

The estimate b yields predicted values FЛҶ s Xb for the response functions.
Since they satisfy the model, these predicted values are smoother than the
sample response functions FЕҪp.. When the model holds, FЛҶ is asymptotically
better than FЕҪp. as an estimator of FЕҪ вҗІ. ЕҪSection 14.2.2.. The estimated covariance matrix of the predicted values is

VЛҶFЛҶ

s

X

ЕҪ

XX

VЛҶy1
F

X

.

y1

XX

.

The test of model goodness of fit uses the residual term

Ws

FЕҪp.

y

Xb

XVЛҶy1
F

FЕҪp. y Xb

s

FЕҪ p.XVЛҶFy1

FЕҪp.

y

bX

ЕҪXX

VЛҶy1
F

X.b,

which compares the sample response functions with their model predicted values. Under H0: FЕҪ вҗІ. y XвҗӨ s 0 that the model holds, W is asymptotically chi-squared with df s u y q, the difference between the number of response functions and the number of model parameters.
One can more closely check the model fit by studying the residuals,
FЕҪp. y FЛҶ. They are orthogonal to the fit FЛҶ, so
cov FЕҪp. s covВҪ FЕҪp. y FЛҶ q FЛҶ5 s cov FЕҪp. y FЛҶ q covЕҪFЛҶ. .

Thus, the estimated covariance matrix of the residuals equals

cov FЕҪp.

y

covЕҪ FЛҶ.

s

VЛҶF

y

VЛҶFЛҶ s

VЛҶF

y

XЕҪXX

VЛҶy1
F

X. X y1 X .

Dividing the residuals by their standard errors yields standardized residuals

having large-sample standard normal distributions.

Hypotheses about contrasts and other effects of explanatory variables have

form H0: CвҗӨ s 0, where C is a known c = q matrix with c F q, having rank

c. The estimator Cb of CвҗӨ is asymptotically normal with mean 0 under H0

and

with

covariance

matrix

estimated

by

CЕҪXX

VЛҶy1 X.y1 CX.
F

The

Wald

statistic

X X X ЛҶy1 X y1
WC s b C CЕҪX VF X.C Cb

ЕҪ 15 .2.

has an approximate chi-squared null distribution with df s c. This statistic also equals the difference between residual chi-squared statistics for the reduced model implied by H0 and the full model. For the special case H0: вҗӨi s 0, WC s bi2rvar ЕҪ bi. has df s 1.

15.1.3 Scope of WLS versus ML Estimation
The WLS approach requires estimating the multinomial covariance matrix of sample responses at each setting of the explanatory variables. It is inapplicable when explanatory variables are continuous, since there may be only one

604

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

observation at each such setting. WLS also becomes less appropriate as the number of explanatory variables increases, since few observations may occur at each of the many combinations of settings. By contrast, in principle, continuous explanatory variables or many explanatory settings are not problematic to ML.
When a certain model holds, with large cell expected frequencies ML and WLS give similar results. Both estimators are in the class of best asymptotically normal estimators. However, practical considerations often favor ML estimation. For example, zero cell counts often adversely affect the WLS approach. The sample response functions may then be ill-defined or have a singular estimated covariance matrix.
WLS shares with quasi-likelihood the feature that inferential results depend only on specifying a model for the mean responses and specifying a variance function and covariance structure ЕҪhere, based on the multinomial.. It does not use the likelihood function for the complete distribution. Thus, inference uses Wald methods.
Historically, an advantage of the WLS approach was computational simplicity. This is not relevant now that software is available for ML analyses and for extensions of WLS ЕҪe.g., quasi-likelihood methods such as GEE. that do not have some of its disadvantages. Thus, WLS is now used much less frequently than it was about 25 years ago. Nonetheless, it has close connections with more sophisticated methods. Some algorithms for calculating ML estimates iteratively use WLS. Also, Miller et al. ЕҪ1993. showed that under certain conditions the solution of the first iteration in the GEE fitting process gives the WLS estimate. This equivalence uses initial estimates based directly on sample values and assumes a saturated association structure that allows a separate correlation parameter for each pair of response categories and each pair of observations in a cluster. In this sense, GEE is an iterated form of WLS. Moreover, in this case, the covariance matrix for the estimates is the same in both approaches.

15.2 BAYESIAN INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA
Methodology using the Bayesian paradigm has advanced tremendously in the past decade. New computational methods make it easier to evaluate posterior distributions for model parameters. Nonetheless, Bayesian inference is not as fully developed or commonly used for categorical data analysis as in many other areas of statistics. For multiway contingency table analysis, partly this is because of the plethora of parameters for multinomial models, often necessitating substantial prior specification. Bayesian theory and methods are beyond the scope of this book. We present only relatively elementary problems in which the Bayesian approach applies quite naturally and is sometimes more appealing than ML. We then briefly summarize more complex developments.

BAYESIAN INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

605

The first applications of Bayesian methods to contingency tables involved smoothing cell counts to improve estimation of cell probabilities ЕҪe.g., Good 1965.. The sample proportions are ordinary ML estimators for the saturated model. When data are sparse, these can have undesirable features. Large sparse tables often contain many sampling zeros, for which 0.0 is unappealing as a probability estimate. In addition, SteinвҖҷs results for estimating multivariate normal means suggest that lower total mean-squared error occurs with Bayes estimators that shrink the sample proportions toward some average value ЕҪEfron and Morris 1975..
In considering Bayesian estimators, we cannot hope to find one that is uniformly better than ML. For instance, suppose that a true cell probability вҗІi s 0. Then the sample proportion pi s 0 with probability 1, and the sample proportion is better than any other estimator. Because parameter values exist for which the sample proportion is optimal, no other estimator is uniformly better over the entire parameter space. Here the criterion of comparison is the expected value of a loss function that measures distance between the estimator and the parameter, such as squared error. In decision-theoretic terms the sample proportion is an admissible estimator, for standard loss functions ЕҪJohnson 1971.. In this sense, the sample mean for the multinomial or multivariate binomial differs from the sample mean for the multivariate normal, which is inadmissible ЕҪdominated by Bayes estimators. when the dimension of the mean vector is at least three ЕҪFerguson 1967, p. 170.. Meeden et al. ЕҪ1998. gave related results for decomposable loglinear models.
Another approach for estimating cell probabilities fits an unsaturated model. Often, though, there is no particular model expected to describe the table well. For I = J cross-classifications of nominal variables, for instance, the independence model rarely fits well. When unsaturated models approximate the true relationship poorly, model-based estimators also have undesirable properties. Although they smooth the data, the smoothing is too severe for large samples. The model-based estimators are inconsistent, converging to values that may be far from the true cell probabilities as n increases.
A Bayesian approach to estimating cell probabilities compromises between sample proportions and model-based estimators. A model still provides part of the smoothing mechanism, with the Bayes estimators shrinking the sample proportions toward a set of proportions satisfying the model.

15.2.1 Bayesian Estimation of Binomial Parameter
We illustrate basic ideas with Bayesian inference for a binomial parameter. Let y denote a binЕҪ n, вҗІ . variate. Since вҗІ falls between 0 and 1, a natural prior density for вҗІ is the beta wЕҪ13.8. in Section 13.3.1x for some choice of вҗЈ ) 0 and вҗӨ ) 0. This satisfies EЕҪвҗІ . s вҗЈrЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ ..
In Bayesian inference the posterior density of a parameter, given the data, is proportional to the product of the prior density with the likelihood

606

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

function. Here, the beta prior depends on вҗІ through вҗІ вҗЈy1ЕҪ1 y вҗІ . вҗӨy1, and the binomial likelihood has kernel depending on вҗІ through вҗІ yЕҪ1 y вҗІ .nyy. Thus, the posterior density hЕҪвҗІ < y. of вҗІ is proportional to

hЕҪ вҗІ < y . A вҗІ y ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ . nyy вҗІ вҗЈy1 ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ . вҗӨy1 s вҗІ yqвҗЈy1 ЕҪ 1 y вҗІ . nyyqвҗӨy1 ,

for 0 F вҗІ F 1. The beta is the conjugate prior distribution. The posterior density is also beta, with parameters вҗЈ * s y q вҗЈ and вҗӨ * s n y y q вҗӨ.
The mean of the posterior distribution is a Bayesian estimator of a parameter. This is optimal when a squared-error loss function ЕҪT y вҗІ .2 describes the consequence of estimating вҗІ by an estimator T ЕҪFerguson 1967, p. 46.. The mean of the beta posterior distribution for вҗІ is
EЕҪвҗІ < y . s вҗЈ*rЕҪвҗЈ* q вҗӨ *. s ЕҪ y q вҗЈ . rЕҪ n q вҗЈ q вҗӨ . s wЕҪ yrn. q ЕҪ1 y w. вҗЈrЕҪвҗЈ q вҗӨ . ,
where w s nrЕҪ n q вҗЈ q вҗӨ .. This is a weighted average of the sample proportion p s yrn and the mean of the prior distribution. For fixed ЕҪвҗЈ, вҗӨ ., the weight given the sample increases as n increases. The standard deviation of the posterior distribution describes the accuracy of this estimator. This equals the square root of
varЕҪвҗІ < y . s вҗЈ *вҗӨ *rЕҪвҗЈ* q вҗӨ *. 2ЕҪвҗЈ* q вҗӨ * q 1. .
For large n the standard deviation is roughly 'pЕҪ1 y p. rn , the ordinary
standard error for the ML estimator вҗІЛҶ s p.
The Bayes estimator requires selecting parameters ЕҪвҗЈ, вҗӨ . for the prior distribution. Complete ignorance about вҗІ might suggest a uniform prior distribution. This is the beta distribution with вҗЈ s вҗӨ s 1. The posterior distribution then has the same shape as the binomial likelihood function. The Bayes estimator is then
EЕҪвҗІ < y. s ЕҪ y q 1.rЕҪ n q 2. .
This shrinks the sample proportion slightly toward 21 . Alternatively, a popular prior with Bayesians is the Jeffreys prior. This is
proportional to the square root of the determinant of the Fisher information matrix for the parameters of interest, for a single observation. With a single parameter вҗӘ , this is w EЕҪСЁ 2 log f ЕҪ y < вҗӘ .rСЁвҗӘ 2 .x1r2 . In the binomial case with вҗӘ s вҗІ and n s 1, this equals wвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .xy1r2 and the prior is beta with вҗЈ s вҗӨ s .5. Brown et al. ЕҪ2001. showed that the posterior generated by this prior yields a confidence interval for вҗІ with good performance. It approximates the ClopperбҺҗPearson interval with the mid-P adjustment ЕҪSections

BAYESIAN INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

607

1.4.4 and 1.4.5.. For a test of H0: вҗІ G 21 against Ha: вҗІ - 21 , a Bayesian P-value is the posterior probability that вҗІ G 21 . Routledge ЕҪ1994. showed that with the Jeffreys prior, this posterior probability approximately equals the
one-sided mid-P-value for the ordinary binomial test.

15.2.2 Dirichlet Prior and Posterior for Multinomial Parameters
These ideas generalize from the binomial to the multinomial ЕҪGood 1965.. Suppose that cell counts ЕҪ n1, . . . , nN . have a multinomial distribution with n s Гқni and parameters вҗІ s ЕҪвҗІ 1, . . . , вҗІN .X. The multinomial likelihood is proportional to

N

ЕҒ

вҗІ

n i

i

.

is1

For a prior distribution over potential вҗІ values, the multivariate generalization of the beta is the Dirichlet density

вҢ«ЕҪГқ вҗӨi . N

gЕҪвҗІ. s

ЕҒ вҗІ iвҗӨ iy1

ЕҒ i вҢ« ЕҪ вҗӨi . is1

for 0 F вҗІi F 1 all i ,

ГқвҗІi s 1,
i

where Г„ вҗӨi ) 04. For it, EЕҪвҗІi. s вҗӨirЕҪГқj вҗӨj.. The posterior density is also Dirichlet, with parameters Г„ni q вҗӨi4. The
Bayes estimator of вҗІi is

EЕҪвҗІi < n1 , . . . , nN . s ЕҪ ni q вҗӨi .

Еҫ n q ГқвҗӨj/ . j

ЕҪ 15 .3.

Let K s Гқ вҗӨj and вҗҘi s EЕҪвҗІi. s вҗӨirK. The Г„вҗҘi4 are prior guesses for the cell probabilities. Bayes estimator ЕҪ15.3. equals the weighted average

nrЕҪ n q K . pi q KrЕҪ n q K . вҗҘi .

ЕҪ 15 .4.

From ЕҪ15.3. the Bayes estimator is a sample proportion when the prior information corresponds to Гқj вҗӨj trials with вҗӨi outcomes of type i, i s 1, . . . , N. This interpretation may provide guidance for choosing Г„ вҗӨi4. The Jeffreys prior sets all вҗӨi s 0.5. Good referred to K as a flattening constant, since with identical Г„ вҗӨi4 ЕҪ15.4. shrinks each sample proportion toward the uniform value вҗҘi s 1rN. Greater flattening occurs as K increases, for fixed n. Hierarchical models treat Г„ вҗӨi4 as unknown and specify a second-stage prior for them ЕҪe.g., Albert and Gupta 1982..
Bayes estimators combine good characteristics of sample proportions and model-based estimators. Like sample proportions and unlike model-based

608

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

estimators, they are consistent even when the model does not hold. Unless the model holds, the weight given the sample proportion increases to 1.0 as the sample size increases. Like model-based estimators and unlike sample proportions, the Bayes estimators smooth the data. The resulting estimates, although slightly biased, usually have smaller total mean-squared error than the sample proportions.

15.2.3 Development of Bayesian Methods for Categorical Data
We now summarize the development of Bayesian methods for categorical data since GoodвҖҷs ЕҪ1965. work on smoothing multinomial proportions. Leonard and Hsu ЕҪ1994. provided a more detailed review. We begin with methods for two-way contingency tables.
For 2 = 2 tables, Altham ЕҪ1969. gave a Bayesian analysis comparing parameters for two independent binomial samples. She tested H0:вҗІ 1 F вҗІ 2 against вҗІ 1 ) вҗІ 2 using independent betaЕҪ вҗЈi, вҗӨi. priors for вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2. Altham showed that the P-value that is the posterior probability that вҗІ 1 F вҗІ 2 can equal the one-sided P-value for FisherвҖҷs exact test. This happens when one uses improper prior distributions ЕҪвҗЈ1, вҗӨ1. s ЕҪ1, 0. and ЕҪвҗЈ2 , вҗӨ2 . s ЕҪ0, 1.. These represent prior belief favoring the null hypothesis, in effect penalizing against concluding that вҗІ 1 ) вҗІ 2. That is, FisherвҖҷs exact test corresponds to a conservative prior distribution.
If вҗЈi s вҗӨi s вҗҘ , i s 1, 2, with 0 F вҗҘ F 1, Altham showed that the Bayesian P-value is smaller than the Fisher P-value. The difference between the two is no greater than the null probability of the observed data. Use of Jeffreys priors with вҗЈi s вҗӨi s 0.5 provides a type of continuity correction to FisherвҖҷs exact test in much the way the mid-P-value does for the frequentist approach. Howard ЕҪ1998. showed that with these priors the posterior probability that вҗІ 1 F вҗІ 2 approximates the one-sided P-value for the large-sample z test using pooled variance ЕҪi.e., the signed square root of the Pearson statistic; see Problem 3.30. for testing H0: вҗІ 1 s вҗІ 2 against Ha: вҗІ 1 ) вҗІ 2. Howard also discussed other priors for 2 = 2 tables, including ones that treat вҗІ 1 and вҗІ 2 as dependent.
Altham ЕҪ1971. showed Bayesian analyses for binomial proportions from matched-pairs data. For a simple model in which the probability of success is the same for each subject at a given occasion, she again showed that the classical exact P-value ЕҪSection 10.1.4, using the binomial distribution. is a Bayesian P-value for a prior distribution favoring H0. For a model similar to ЕҪ10.8. in which the probability varies by subject but the occasion effect is constant, she showed that the Bayesian evidence against the null is weaker as the number of pairs giving the same response at both occasions increases, for fixed values of the numbers of pairs giving different responses at the two occasions. This differs from the conditional ML result, which does not

BAYESIAN INFERENCE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA

609

depend on such pairs ЕҪSection 10.2.3.. Ghosh et al. ЕҪ2000. showed related results.
The Bayesian approaches presented so far focused directly on cell probabilities by using a prior distribution for them. Lindley ЕҪ1964. did this with I = J contingency tables. He considered the posterior distribution of contrasts of log probabilities, such as the log odds ratio. An alternative approach ЕҪLaird 1978; Leonard 1975. focused on parameters of the saturated loglinear model, using normal priors. This is not a conjugate prior, but normal distributions can approximate the posterior. Using independent normal NЕҪ0, вҗҙ 2 . distributions for the association parameters is a way of inducing shrinkage toward the independence model ЕҪLaird 1978.. A hierarchical approach puts second-stage priors on the parameters of the prior distribution ЕҪLeonard 1975..
Historically, a barrier for the Bayesian approach has been the difficulty of calculating the posterior distribution when the prior is not conjugate. This is less problematic with modern ways of approximating posterior distributions by simulating samples from them. These include the importance sampling generalization of Monte Carlo simulation ЕҪZellner and Rossi 1984. and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods such as Gibbs sampling ЕҪGelfand and Smith 1990.. Zellner and Rossi used Bayesian methods for logistic regression and Gelfand and Smith considered a class of multinomial models with Dirichlet prior. Zeger and Karim ЕҪ1991. fitted generalized linear mixed models ЕҪGLMMs. essentially using a Bayesian framework with priors for fixed and random effects.
The focus on distributions for random effects in GLMMs in articles such as Zeger and Karim ЕҪ1991. led to the treatment of parameters in GLMs as random variables with a fully Bayesian approach. Dey et al. ЕҪ2000. edited a collection of articles that provided Bayesian analyses for GLMs. For instance, in that volume Gelfand and Ghosh surveyed the subject, Albert and Ghosh reviewed item response modeling, Chib modeled correlated binary data, and Chen and Dey modeled correlated ordinal data.
Bayesian methods are used increasingly in applications. For instance, Skene and Wakefield ЕҪ1990. modeled multicenter binary response studies with a logit model that allows the treatmentбҺҗresponse log odds ratio to vary among centers. This gives a Bayesian alternative to the GLMM analysis presented in Section 12.3.4. Daniels and Gatsonis ЕҪ1999. used multi-level GLMs to analyze geographic and temporal trends with clustered longitudinal binary data. This built on hierarchical modeling ideas introduced by Wong and Mason ЕҪ1985.. An article by Landrum and Normand in Dey et al. ЕҪ2000. gave a case study using Bayesian ordinal probit and logit models. Chaloner and Larntz ЕҪ1989. used a Bayesian approach to determining optimal design for experiments using logistic regression. J. Albert has suggested Bayesian models for a variety of categorical data analyses. For instance, Albert ЕҪ1997. modeled associations in two-way tables and Albert and Chib ЕҪ1993. studied

610

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

binary regression modeling, focusing on the probit case with extensions to ordered multinomial responses.

15.2.4 Data-Dependent Choice of Prior Distribution

With Bayesian analyses, careful prior specification is necessary. The use of an improper prior, such as the uniform prior over the entire or positive real line, sometimes results in improper posteriors. One may not realize this from the output of software for Bayesian fitting. In addition, with simulation methods it may not be obvious when convergence has occurred. Be suspicious if results are dramatically different from ordinary ML frequentist results.
Some dislike the subjectivity of the Bayesian approach inherent in selecting a prior distribution. Instead of choosing particular parameters for a prior distribution, it is increasingly popular to use a hierarchical approach in which those parameters themselves have a second-stage prior distribution. Alternatively, the empirical Bayes approach lets the data suggest parameter values for use in the prior distribution ЕҪe.g., Efron and Morris 1975.. This approach uses the prior that maximizes the marginal probability of the observed data, integrating out with respect to the prior. Laird ЕҪ1978. did this for the loglinear model, estimating вҗҙ 2 in normal priors for association parameters by finding the value that maximizes an approximation for the marginal distribution of the cell counts, evaluated at the observed data. A disadvantage of empirical Bayes compared to the hierarchical approach is that it does not take into account the source of variability due to substituting estimates for prior parameters.
Fienberg and Holland ЕҪ1973. proposed analyses for contingency tables with data-dependent priors. For a particular choice of Dirichlet means Г„вҗҘi4 for the Bayes estimator ЕҪ15.4., they showed that the minimum total meansquared error occurs when

K

s

ЕҪ1

y

Гқ

вҗІ

2 i

.

Гқ ЕҪвҗҘi y вҗІi.2 .

ЕҪ 15 .5.

The optimal K s K ЕҪвҗҘ, вҗІ. depends on вҗІ, so they used the estimate K ЕҪвҗҘ, p. of K in which the sample proportion p replaces вҗІ. As p falls closer to the prior guess вҗҘ, K ЕҪвҗҘ, p. increases and the prior guess receives more weight in the posterior estimate. They selected the prior pattern Г„вҗҘi4 for the cell probabilities based on the fit of a simple model. For two-way tables, they used the independence fit Г„вҗҘi j s piqpqj4. The Bayes estimator then shrinks sample proportions toward that fit.
As in other inference, Bayesian modeling should normally account for any
ordering in the response categories. For instance, in the method just men-
tioned for smoothing contingency tables, one could shrink toward an ordinal
model.

OTHER METHODS OF ESTIMATION

611

15.3 OTHER METHODS OF ESTIMATION

In this final section we describe some alternative estimation methods for categorical data. Consider estimation of вҗІ or вҗӘ, assuming a model вҗІ s вҗІЕҪвҗӘ..
Let ЛңвҗӘ denote a generic estimator of вҗӘ, for which вҗІЛң s вҗІЕҪЛңвҗӘ. estimates вҗІ. The ML estimator ЛҶвҗӘ maximizes the likelihood. It also minimizes the deviance
statistic G2 comparing observed and fitted proportions ЕҪSection 14.3.4..

15.3.2 Minimum Chi-Squared Estimators Other estimators minimize other measures of distance between вҗІЕҪвҗӘ. and p.
The value ЛңвҗӘ that minimizes the Pearson statistic

X 2 вҗІЕҪвҗӘ., p s nГқ

pi y вҗІ i ЕҪ вҗӘ. 2 вҗІiЕҪвҗӘ.

is called the minimum chi-squared estimate. It is simpler to calculate the estimate that minimizes the modified statistic

Xmod 2 вҗІ ЕҪ вҗӘ. , p s n Гқ

pi y вҗІ i ЕҪ вҗӘ. 2
pi

ЕҪ 15 .6.

that replaces the denominator by the sample proportion. This is called the

minimum modified chi-squared estimate. It is the solution for вҗӘ to the

equations

Еҫ / Гқ вҗІiЕҪвҗӘ.
i pi

СЁвҗІiЕҪ вҗӘ.
СЁвҗӘj

s 0,

j s 1, . . . , q.

Neyman ЕҪ1949. introduced minimum modified chi-squared estimators. He showed that they and minimum chi-squared estimators are best asymptotically normal ЕҪBAN. estimators. When the model holds, they are asymptotically ЕҪas n в„ў Пұ. equivalent to ML estimators. Under the model, different estimation methods ЕҪML, WLS, minimum chi-squared, etc.. yield nearly identical estimates of parameters when n is large. This happens partly because the estimators are consistent, converging in probability to вҗӘ as n increases. When the model does not hold, estimates for different methods can be quite different, even when n is large. The estimators converge to values for which the model gives the best approximation to reality, and this approximation is different when best is defined in terms of minimizing G2 rather than minimizing X 2 or some other measure.
For any n, minimum modified chi-squared estimates are sometimes identical to WLS estimates. The connection refers to an alternative way of

612

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

specifying a model, using a set of constraint equations for вҗІ ,
Г„ gjЕҪвҗІ1, . . . , вҗІN . s 04.
For instance, for an I = J table, the ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. constraint equations log вҗІ i j y log вҗІ i, jq1 y log вҗІ iq1 , j q log вҗІ iq1 , jq1 s 0

specify the model of independence. The number of constraint equations equals the residual df for the model.
Neyman ЕҪ1949. noted that minimum modified chi-squared estimates result from minimizing

N ЕҪ pi y вҗІ i . 2 Nyq

Гқ

q Гқ вҗӯj gjЕҪвҗІ1, . . . , вҗІN .

is1

pi

js1

with respect to вҗІ, where the Г„вҗӯj4 are Lagrange multipliers. When the constraint equations are linear in вҗІ, the resulting estimating equations are linear. Then Bhapkar ЕҪ1966. showed that these estimators are identical to WLS estimators. The statistic ЕҪ15.6. then equals the WLS residual statistic ЕҪSection 15.1.2. for testing model fit.
Usually, however, constraint equations are nonlinear in вҗІ, such as for the independence model. The WLS estimator is then the minimum modified chi-squared estimator based on a linearized version of the constraints,
gj ЕҪp. q ЕҪ вҗІ y p. РҲСЁ gj ЕҪ вҗІ . rСЁ вҗІ s 0,

with differential vector evaluated at p. Berkson ЕҪ1944, 1955, 1980. was a strong advocate of minimum chi-squared
methods. For logistic regression, his minimum logit chi-squared estimators minimized a weighted sum of squares between sample logits and linear predictions. Mantel ЕҪ1985. criticized such methods, noting that their consistency requires group sizes to grow large, whereas ML ЕҪor conditional ML, when there are many nuisance parameters. is consistent however information goes to the limit ЕҪsee also Problem 15.14..

15.3.2 Minimum Discrimination Information
Kullback ЕҪ1959. formulated estimation by minimum discrimination information ЕҪMDI.. The discrimination information for two probability vectors вҗІ and вҗҘ is

N
I ЕҪ вҗІ ; вҗҘ . s Гқ вҗІi logЕҪвҗІirвҗҘi . .
is1

ЕҪ 15 .7.

OTHER METHODS OF ESTIMATION

613

This directed measure of distance between вҗІ and вҗҘ is nonnegative, equaling 0 only when вҗІ s вҗҘ. Gokhale and Kullback ЕҪ1978. studied MDI estimates that minimize IЕҪ вҗІ; вҗҘ ., subject to model constraints, using вҗҘ s p for some problems and вҗҘ with вҗҘ1 s вҗҘ2 s РёРёРё s вҗҘN s 1rN for others. Good ЕҪ1963. conducted related work in the area of maximum entropy.
In some cases with Г„вҗҘi s 1rN4, the MDI estimator is identical to the ML estimator ЕҪSimon 1973.. With вҗҘ s p it is not ML, but it has similar asymptotic properties, being best asymptotically normal ЕҪBAN.. Then Gokhale and Kullback recommended testing goodness of fit using twice the minimized value of IЕҪ вҗІ; p.. This statistic reverses the roles of p and вҗІ relative to G2, much as Xmod 2 in ЕҪ15.6. reverses their roles relative to X 2. Both statistics fall in the class of power divergence statistics ЕҪCressie and Read 1984; see also Problem 3.34. and have similar asymptotic properties. More generally, one could choose any member of the power divergence statistics and define estimates to be the values minimizing it. Under regularity conditions, they are all BAN.

15.3.3 Kernel Smoothing

Kernel estimation is a smoothing method that estimates a probability density or mass function without assuming a parametric distribution. Let K denote a matrix containing nonnegative elements and having column sums equal to 1. Kernel estimates of cell probabilities in a contingency table have form

вҗІЛң s Kp.

ЕҪ 15 .8.

For unordered multinomials with N categories, Aitchison and Aitken ЕҪ1976. used

kij s вҗӯ, i s j
s ЕҪ1 y вҗӯ.rЕҪ N y 1. , i / j

for ЕҪ1rN . F вҗӯ F 1. The resulting kernel estimator of вҗІ has form

ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ . p q вҗЈ ЕҪ1rN . ,

ЕҪ 15 .9.

where вҗЈ s NЕҪ1 y вҗӯ.rЕҪ N y 1.. This estimator shrinks the sample proportion toward ЕҪ1rN, . . . , 1rN .. As вҗӯ decreases from 1 to 1rN, the smoothing parameter вҗЈ increases from 0 to 1. Brown and Rundell ЕҪ1985. proved that when no вҗІi s 1, вҗӯ - 1 exists such that the total mean squared error is smaller for this kernel estimator than for the sample proportions. Results for other shrinkage estimators applied to multivariate means suggest that the improvement for the kernel estimator can be large when n is small and the true cell probabilities are roughly equal.
Brown and Rundell generalized kernel smoothing for multiway contingency tables that may contain both nominal and ordinal variables. For a

614

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

ВҪ T-way table, let L k be a stochastic matrix ЕҪi.e., row and column sums equal to
1. with elements

lk, ij s

вҗӯk ,
dkЕҪ i, j. ЕҪ1 y вҗӯk . ,

isj i / j,

k s 1, . . . , T. They let K in ЕҪ15.8. be the Kronecker product

K s L1 m РёРёРё m LT .

When variable k is ordinal, shrinkage alone is not enough, and it helps to borrow information from nearby cells. Then dkЕҪi, j. is chosen to be smaller for greater distances between categories i and j. If variable k is nominal, the natural choice is dkЕҪi, j. s 1rЕҪ Ik y 1., where Ik is the number of categories for variable k. For fixed Г„вҗӯk4, collapsing the smoothed table gives the same result as smoothing the corresponding collapsing of the original table. With Г„вҗӯk s вҗӯ, k s 1, . . . , T 4, Brown and Rundell described ways of finding вҗӯ to minimize an unbiased estimate of the total mean squared error.
Dong and Simonoff ЕҪ1995. and Simonoff ЕҪ1986. described other approaches for ordered categories. Most such kernels yield probability estimates of the form
вҗІЛңi s ЕҪ1 y вҗЈ . pi q вҗЈ = smootheri ,

where the smoothing is designed to work well when true probabilities in nearby cells are similar.

15.3.4 Penalized Likelihood
Good and Gaskins ЕҪ1971. introduced the penalized likelihood method for density estimation. For log likelihood LЕҪ вҗІ., the estimator maximizes
L*ЕҪ вҗІ . s LЕҪ вҗІ . y вҗЈ ЕҪ вҗІ .
where вҗЈ ЕҪРё. is a function that provides a roughness penalty. That is, вҗЈ ЕҪ вҗІ. decreases as elements of вҗІ are smoother, in some sense. The penalized likelihood estimator has a Bayesian interpretation. With prior density proportional to expwyвҗЈ ЕҪ вҗІ.x, the posterior density is proportional to the penalized likelihood function. Hence, the mode of the posterior distribution equals the penalized likelihood estimator.
Simonoff ЕҪ1983. applied penalized likelihood to estimating cell probabilities вҗІ. Like Bayesian and kernel methods, it provides estimates that are smoother than the sample proportions. For a single multinomial with ordered categories, Simonoff ЕҪ1983. used penalty function вҗЈ ЕҪ вҗІ. s вҗӯГқis1 Ny1 ЕҪlog вҗІi y log вҗІiq1 .2, which encourages adjacent category estimates to be similar. For

NOTES

615

two-way contingency tables, Simonoff suggested using вҗЈ ЕҪ вҗІ. s вҗӯГқiГқjЕҪlog вҗӘi j.2 with the local odds ratios. This provides shrinkage toward the independence estimator. One chooses the smoothing parameter вҗӯ to minimize an approximation for the mean-squared error of the estimator.
In evaluating smoothing methods such as kernel smoothing and penalized likelihood, it is useful to distinguish between large-sample asymptotics with a fixed number of cells N and sparse-data asymptotics for which N grows with n ЕҪrecall Section 6.3.4.. For the former, these smoothing methods and Bayesian inference behave asymptotically like ordinary ML ЕҪi.e., the sample proportions.. They have the same rate of convergence to true probabilities. These methods then improve over ML primarily for small samples, where the benefit of вҖҳвҖҳborrowing from the wholeвҖҷвҖҷ occurs. For sparse-data asymptotics, however, smoothing is particularly beneficial. As the dimensions of a table increase, the number of cells grows exponentially and the вҖҳвҖҳcurse of dimensionalityвҖҷвҖҷ occurs. Accurate estimation becomes more difficult, with estimators converging more slowly to true values. The table then has an increasing proportion of empty cells. Smoothing can be better than ML even asymptotically. For such results, see Fienberg and Holland ЕҪ1973. for the Dirichletbased Bayes multinomial estimator and Simonoff ЕҪ1983. for penalized likelihood with the multinomial. Simonoff showed that consipstency can occur with
the latter estimator in the sense that supi вҗІЛҶirвҗІi y 1 0 as n and N grow
and the probabilities themselves approach 0. For surveys of smoothing methods, see Fahrmeir and Tutz ЕҪ2001, Chap. 5.,
Lloyd ЕҪ1999, Chap. 5., and Simonoff ЕҪ1996, Chap. 6; 1998.. As Simonoff noted, all smoothing methods attempt to balance the low bias of undersmoothing with the low variability of oversmoothing. The methods require input from the user about the degree of smoothness, whether it be determined by a prior distribution or some type of smoothing parameter.
In summary, many methods exist for smoothing categorical data. Besides those discussed in this section, there are traditional model-building methods. Some of these, such as generalized additive models ЕҪSection 4.8., are also specifically directed toward smoothing. A particular type of smoothing method may seem most natural for a given application. An advantage of the Bayesian approach is that its entire formulation seems less ad hoc than some others.

6

NOTES
Section 15.1: Weighted Least Squares for Categorical Data
15.1. Applications of WLS include fitting mean response models ЕҪGrizzle et al. 1969. and models for marginal distributions ЕҪKoch et al. 1977.. For general discussion, see Bhapkar and Koch ЕҪ1968., Imrey et al. ЕҪ1981., and Koch et al. ЕҪ1985..

616

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

Section 15.2: Bayesian Inference for Categorical Data 15.2. Other literature on Bayesian analyses of categorical responses includes Fienberg et al. ЕҪ1999., Forster and Smith ЕҪ1998., Good ЕҪ1976., Knuiman and Speed ЕҪ1988., Spiegelhalter and Smith ЕҪ1982., and Walley ЕҪ1996..

Section 15.3: Other Methods of Estimation

15.3. 15.4. 15.5.

For further discussion of minimum chi-squared methods, see Bhapkar ЕҪ1966., Koch et al. ЕҪ1985., Neyman ЕҪ1949., and Rao ЕҪ1963.. For the use of minimum discrimination information, see Gokhale and Kullback ЕҪ1978., Ireland and Kullback ЕҪ1968a, b., Ireland et al. ЕҪ1969., and Ku et al. ЕҪ1971.. Hall and Titterington ЕҪ1987. studied rates of convergence for multinomial kernel estimators. They defined one that achieves the optimal rate. Ordinary kernel estimators tend to be biased toward zero at the boundary of a table. Dong and Simonoff ЕҪ1994. dealt with improving kernel estimates on the boundary of large sparse tables. Kernel methods are also useful for discrete regression modeling. For binary response data, Copas ЕҪ1983. used one to display in a nonparametric manner the dependence of PЕҪY s 1. on x.

PROBLEMS
Applications
15.1 Consider the mean response model fitted in Section 7.4.6. Show how to use WLS for this analysis. Identify the number of multinomial samples I, the number of response categories J, the response functions F, the model matrix X, the parameter vector вҗӨ, and the
estimated covariance matrix VЛҶF.
15.2 Use WLS to conduct the longitudinal analysis of depression in Section 11.2.1. Using software ЕҪe.g., SAS: PROC CATMOD., obtain WLS estimates and standard errors and compare to the ML results.
15.3 Refer to Problem 15.2. Using these data, describe the differences between ЕҪa. WLS and ML, and ЕҪb. WLS and GEE methods for marginal models with multivariate categorical response data.
15.4 Using data from Section 1.4.3, obtain a Bayesian estimate of the proportion of vegetarians. Explain how you chose the prior distribution. Compare results to those with ML.
15.5 Refer to Table 9.8. Consider the model that simultaneously assumes ЕҪ9.12. as well as linear logit relationships for the marginal effects of age on breathlessness and on wheeze.

PROBLEMS

617

a. Specify C, A, and X for which this model has form C log AвҗІ s XвҗӨ. b. Using software, fit the model and interpret estimates.

Theory and Methods

15.6 Consider marginal homogeneity for an I = I table. a. Letting FЕҪ вҗІ. s AвҗІ, explain how ЕҪi. FЕҪ вҗІ. s 0, where A has I y 1 rows, and ЕҪii. FЕҪ вҗІ. s XвҗӨ, where A has 2ЕҪ I y 1. rows and вҗӨ has I y 1 elements. In part ЕҪii., show A, вҗІ, X, вҗӨ when I s 3. b. Explain how to use WLS to test marginal homogeneity. wThis is BhapkarвҖҷs test ЕҪ10.16..x
15.7 For WLS with FЕҪ вҗІ. s CwlogЕҪAвҗІ.x, show that Q s CwdiagЕҪAвҗІ.xy1A.
15.8 With WLS, show that wFЕҪp. y XвҗӨxРҲVЛҶFy1wFЕҪp. y XвҗӨx is minimized by вҗӨ s ЕҪXРҲVЛҶFy1 X.y1 XРҲVЛҶFy1 FЕҪp..
15.9 The response functions FЕҪp. have asymptotic covariance matrix VF. Derive the asymptotic covariance matrix of the WLS model parame-
ter estimator b and the predicted values FЛҶ s Xb.

15.10

Consider the Bayes estimator of a binomial parameter вҗІ using a beta prior distribution.
a. Does any beta prior distribution produce a Bayes estimator that coincides with the ML estimator?
b. Show that the ML estimator is a limit of Bayes estimators, for a certain sequence of beta prior parameter values.
c. Find an improper prior density ЕҪone for which its integral is not finite. such that the Bayes estimator coincides with the ML estimator. ЕҪIn this sense, the ML estimator is a generalized Bayes estimator..
d. For Bayesian inference using loss function wЕҪвҗӘ .ЕҪT y вҗӘ .2, the Bayes estimator of вҗӘ is the posterior expected value of вҗӘ wЕҪвҗӘ . divided by the posterior expected value of wЕҪвҗӘ . ЕҪFerguson 1967, p. 47.. With loss function ЕҪT y вҗІ .2rwвҗІ ЕҪ1 y вҗІ .x, show the ML estimator of вҗІ is a Bayes estimator for the uniform prior distribution.
e. The risk function is the expected loss, treated as a function of вҗІ . For the loss function in part ЕҪd., show the risk function is constant. ЕҪBayesвҖҷ estimators with constant risk are minimax; their maximum risk is no greater than the maximum risk for any other estimator..
f. Show that the Jeffreys prior for вҗІ equals the beta density with вҗЈ s вҗӨ s .5.

618

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATION THEORY FOR PARAMETRIC MODELS

15.11

For the Dirichlet prior for multinomial probabilities, show the posterior expected value of вҗІi is ЕҪ15.3.. Derive the expression for this Bayes estimator as a weighted average of pi and EЕҪвҗІi..

15.12 For Bayes estimator ЕҪ15.4., show that the total mean squared error is

KrЕҪ n q K . 2 Гқ ЕҪвҗІi y вҗҘi . 2 q nrЕҪ n q K . 2 ЕҪ1 y Гқ вҗІi2 . .

Show that ЕҪ15.5. is the value of K that minimizes this.

15.13

Refer to Problem 15.6. For marginal homogeneity, explain why the minimum modified chi-squared estimates are identical to WLS estimates.

15.14

Let yi be a binЕҪ ni, вҗІi. variate for group i, i s 1, . . . , N, with Г„ yi4 independent. Consider the model that вҗІ 1 s РёРёРё s вҗІN . Denote that common value by вҗІ . a. Show that the ML estimator of вҗІ is p s ЕҪГқi yi.rЕҪГқi ni..
b. The minimum chi-squared estimator вҗІЛң is the value of вҗІ minimiz-
ing

N ЕҪ yirni . y вҗІ 2 N ЕҪ yirni . y вҗІ 2

Гқ

qГқ

.

is1

вҗІ

is1

1yвҗІ

The second term results from comparing ЕҪ1 y yirni. to ЕҪ1 y вҗІ ., the proportions in the second category. If n1 s РёРёРё s nN s 1,
show that вҗІЛң minimizes NpЕҪ1 y вҗІ .rвҗІ q NЕҪ1 y p.вҗІrЕҪ1 y вҗІ ..
Hence show

вҗІЛң s p1r2r p1r2 q ЕҪ 1 y p. 1r2 .

Note

the

bias

toward

1 2

in

this

estimator.

c. Argue that as N в„ў Пұ with all ni s 1, the ML estimator is consistent but the minimum chi-squared estimator is not ЕҪMantel 1985..

15.15

Refer to Problem 15.14. For N s 2 groups with n1 and n2 independent observations, find the minimum modified chi-squared estimator
of вҗІ . Compare it to the ML estimator.

15.16

Show that the kernel estimator ЕҪ15.9. is the same as the Bayes estimator ЕҪ15.3. for the Dirichlet prior with Г„ вҗӨi s вҗЈ nrЕҪ1 y вҗЈ . N4. Using this result, suggest a way of letting the data determine the
value of вҗЈ in the kernel estimator.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
CHAPTER 16
Historical Tour of Categorical Data Analysis*
This book concludes with an informal historical overview of the evolution of methods for categorical data analysis ЕҪCDA.. We have seen that categorical scales are pervasive in the social sciences and the biomedical sciences. Not surprisingly, the development of GLMs for categorical responses was fostered by statisticians having ties to the social sciences or to the biomedical sciences.
Only in the last quarter of the twentieth century did these models receive the attention given early in the century to models for continuous data. Regression models for continuous variables evolved out of Francis GaltonвҖҷs breakthroughs in the 1880s. The strong influence of R. A. Fisher, G. Udny Yule, and other statisticians on experimentation in agriculture and biological sciences ensured widespread adoption of regression and ANOVA modeling by the mid-twentieth century. On the other hand, despite influential articles around 1900 by Karl Pearson and Yule on association between categorical variables, models for categorical responses received scant attention until the 1960s.
The beginnings of CDA were often shrouded in controversy. Key figures in the development of statistical science made groundbreaking contributions, but these statisticians were often in heated disagreement with one another.
16.1 PEARSONвҖ“YULE ASSOCIATION CONTROVERSY
Much of the early development of methods for CDA took place in England, and it is fitting that we begin our historical tour in London at the beginning of the twentieth century. The year 1900 is an apt starting point, since in that year Karl Pearson introduced his chi-squared statistic ЕҪ X 2 . and G. Udny Yule presented the odds ratio and related measures of association. Before
619

620

HISTORICAL TOUR OF CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

then most work focused on descriptive aspects for relatively simple measures. For instance, Goodman and Kruskal ЕҪ1959. noted that the Belgian social statistician Adolphe Quetelet used the relative risk in 1849.
By 1900, Karl Pearson ЕҪ1857бҺҗ1936. was already well known in the statistics community. He was head of a statistical laboratory at University College in London. His work the previous decade included developing a family of skewed probability distributions ЕҪcalled Pearson curВ®es., obtaining the product-moment estimate of the correlation coefficient and finding its standard error, and extending GaltonвҖҷs work on linear regression. In fact, Pearson was a true renaissance man, writing on a wide variety of topics that included art, religion, philosophy, law, socialism, womenвҖҷs rights, physics, genetics, eugenics, and evolution. PearsonвҖҷs motivation for developing the chi-squared test included testing whether outcomes on a roulette wheel in Monte Carlo varied randomly, checking the fit to various data sets of normal distributions and Pearson curves, and testing statistical independence in two-way contingency tables.
Much of the literature on CDA early in the twentieth century consisted of vocal debates about appropriate ways to summarize association. PearsonвҖҷs approach assumed that continuous bivariate distributions underlie two-way contingency tables ЕҪPearson 1904, 1913.. He argued in favor of approximating a measure, such as the correlation, for the underlying continuum. In 1904, Pearson introduced the term contingency as a вҖҳвҖҳmeasure of the total deviation of the classification from independent probability,вҖҷвҖҷ and he introduced measures to describe its extent. The tetrachoric correlation is a ML estimate of the correlation for a bivariate normal distribution assumed to underlie counts in 2 = 2 tables. It is the correlation value вҗі in the bivariate normal density that would produce cell probabilities equal to the sample cell proportions when that density is collapsed to a 2 = 2 table having the same marginal proportions as the observed table. The mean-square contingency and the contingency coefficient are normalizations of X 2 to the ЕҪ0, 1. scale. PearsonвҖҷs contingency coefficient ЕҪProblem 3.33. for I = J tables standardized X 2 to approximate an underlying correlation.
George Udny Yule ЕҪ1871бҺҗ1951., a British contemporary of PearsonвҖҷs, took a different approach. Having completed pioneering work developing multiple regression models and multiple and partial correlation coefficients, Yule turned his attention between 1900 and 1912 to association in contingency tables. He believed that many categorical variables, such as ЕҪvaccinated, unvaccinated. and ЕҪdied, survived., are inherently discrete. Yule defined indices directly using cell counts without assuming an underlying continuum. He popularized the odds ratio вҗӘ wwhich Goodman ЕҪ2000. noted may first have
been proposed by a Hungarian statistician, J. KЛқorВЁosyx and a transformation of
it to the wy1, q1x scale, Q s ЕҪвҗӘ y 1.rЕҪвҗӘ q 1., now called YuleвҖҷs Q ЕҪProblem 2.36.. Discussing one of PearsonвҖҷs measures that assumes underlying normality, Yule argued ЕҪ1912, p. 612. that вҖҳвҖҳat best the normal coefficient can only be said to give us in cases like these a hypothetical correlation between

PEARSONбҺҗYULE ASSOCIATION CONTROVERSY

621

supposititious variables. The introduction of needless and unverifiable hypotheses does not appear to me a desirable proceeding in scientific work.вҖҷвҖҷ Yule ЕҪ1903. also showed the potential discrepancy between marginal and conditional associations in contingency tables, later studied by E. H. Simpson ЕҪ1951. and now called SimpsonвҖҷs paradox.
In the first quarter of the twentieth century, Karl Pearson was the rarely challenged leader of statistical science in Britain. PearsonвҖҷs strong personality did not take kindly to criticism, and he reacted negatively to YuleвҖҷs ideas. He argued that YuleвҖҷs own coefficients were unsuitable. For instance, Pearson claimed that their values were unstable, since different collapsings of I = J tables to 2 = 2 tables could produce quite different values of the measures. Pearson and D. Heron ЕҪ1913. filled more than 150 pages of Biometrika, a journal he co-founded and edited, with a scathing reply to YuleвҖҷs criticism. In a passage critical also of YuleвҖҷs well-received book An Introduction to the Theory of Statistics, they stated вҖҳвҖҳIf Mr. YuleвҖҷs views are accepted, irreparable damage will be done to the growth of modern statistical theory. . . . wYuleвҖҷs Qx has never been and never will be used in any work done under his wPearsonвҖҷsx supervision. . . . We regret having to draw attention to the manner in which Mr. Yule has gone astray at every stage in his treatment of association, but criticism of his methods has been thrust on us not only by Mr. YuleвҖҷs recent attack, but also by the unthinking praise which has been bestowed on a text-book which at many points can only lead statistical students hopelessly astray.вҖҷвҖҷ Pearson and Heron attacked YuleвҖҷs вҖҳвҖҳhalf-baked notionsвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳspecious reasoningвҖҷвҖҷ and argued that Yule would have to withdraw his ideas вҖҳвҖҳif he wishes to maintain any reputation as a statistician.вҖҷвҖҷ
In retrospect, Pearson and Yule both had valid points. Some classifications, such as most nominal variables, have no apparent underlying continuous distribution. On the other hand, many applications relate naturally to an underlying continuum, and that fact can motivate models and inference ЕҪe.g., Section 7.2.3.. Goodman ЕҪ1981a, b. noted that the ordinal models presented in Sections 9.4.1 and 9.6.1 provide a sort of reconciliation between Yule and Pearson, since YuleвҖҷs odds ratio characterizes models that fit well when underlying distributions are approximately normal.
Half a century after the PearsonбҺҗYule controversy, Leo Goodman and William Kruskal surveyed the development of association measures for contingency tables and made many contributions of their own. Their 1979 book reprinted four influential articles of theirs from the Journal of the American Statistical Association on this topic. Initial development of many measures occurred in the nineteenth century. Their 1959 article contains the following quote from M. H. Doolittle in 1887, which illustrates the lack of precision in early attempts to quantify the meaning of association even in 2 = 2 tables: вҖҳвҖҳHaving given the number of instances respectively in which things are both thus and so, in which they are thus but not so, in which they are so but not thus, and in which they are neither thus nor so, it is required to eliminate the general quantitative relativity inhering in the mere thingness

622

HISTORICAL TOUR OF CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

of the things, and to determine the special quantitative relativity subsisting between the thusness and the soness of the things.вҖҷвҖҷ Goodman ЕҪ2000. added to the historical survey and proposed a new measure.

16.2 R. A. FISHERвҖҷS CONTRIBUTIONS
PearsonвҖҷs disagreements with Yule were minor compared to his later ones with Ronald A. Fisher ЕҪ1890бҺҗ1962.. Using a geometric representation, Fisher ЕҪ1922. introduced degrees of freedom to characterize the family of chi-squared distributions. Fisher claimed that for tests of independence in I = J tables, X 2 has df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1.. By contrast, Pearson ЕҪ1900, 1904. had argued that for any application of X 2, the index that Fisher later identified as df equals the number of cells minus 1, or IJ y 1 for two-way tables. Fisher pointed out, however, that estimating hypothesized cell probabilities using estimated row and column probabilities resulted in an additional ЕҪ I y 1. q ЕҪ J y 1. constraints on the fitted values, thus affecting the distribution of X 2.
Not surprisingly, Pearson ЕҪ1922. reacted critically to FisherвҖҷs suggestion that his df formula was incorrect. He stated: вҖҳвҖҳI hold that such a view wFisherвҖҷsx is entirely erroneous, and that the writer has done no service to the science of statistics by giving it broad-cast circulation in the pages of the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. . . . I trust my critic will pardon me for comparing him with Don Quixote tilting at the windmill; he must either destroy himself, or the whole theory of probable errors, for they are invariably based on using sample values for those of the sampled population unknown to us.вҖҷвҖҷ Pearson claimed that using row and column sample proportions to estimate unknown probabilities had negligible effect on large-sample distributions, although he had realized ЕҪPearson 1917. that df must be adjusted when the cell counts have linear constraints. Fisher was unable to get his rebuttal published by the Royal Statistical Society, and he ultimately resigned his membership.
Statisticians soon realized that Fisher was correct, but he maintained much bitterness over this and other dealings with Pearson. In the preface to a later volume of his collected works, he remarked that his 1922 article вҖҳвҖҳhad to find its way to publication past critics who, in the first place, could not believe that PearsonвҖҷs work stood in need of correction, and who, if this had to be admitted, were sure that they themselves had corrected it.вҖҷвҖҷ Writing about Pearson: he stated: вҖҳвҖҳIf peevish intolerance of free opinion in others is a sign of senility, it is one which he had developed at an early age.вҖҷвҖҷ In Fisher ЕҪ1926., he was able to dig the knife a bit deeper into the Pearson family using 11,688 2 = 2 tables randomly generated assuming independence by Karl PearsonвҖҷs son, E. S. Pearson. Fisher showed that the sample mean of X 2 for these tables was 1.00001, much closer to the 1.0 predicted by his formula for EЕҪ X 2 . of df s ЕҪ I y 1.ЕҪ J y 1. s 1 than PearsonвҖҷs IJ y 1 s 3. His daughter,

R. A. FISHERвҖҷS CONTRIBUTIONS

623

Joan Fisher Box ЕҪ1978., discussed this and other conflicts between Fisher and Pearson. Hald ЕҪ1998, pp. 652бҺҗ663., Plackett ЕҪ1983., and Stigler ЕҪ1999, Chap. 19. summarized the chi-squared controversy.
FisherвҖҷs preeminent reputation among statisticians today accrues mainly from his theoretical work ЕҪintroducing concepts such as sufficiency, information, and optimal properties of ML estimators. and his methodological contributions to the design of experiments and the analysis of variance. Although not so well known for work in CDA, he made other interesting contributions. Moreover, he made good use of the methods in his applied work. For instance, Fisher was also a famed geneticist. In one article, he used PearsonвҖҷs goodness-of-fit test to check MendelвҖҷs theories of natural inheritance and showed that the fit was too good ЕҪSection 1.5.3..
Fisher realized the limitations of large-sample methods for laboratory work, and he was at the forefront of advocating specialized small-sample methods. Writing about large-sample methods in the preface to the first edition of his classic text Statistical Methods for Research Workers, he stated: вҖҳвҖҳwTxhe traditional machinery of statistical processes is wholly unsuited to the needs of practical research. Not only does it take a cannon to shoot a sparrow, but it misses the sparrow! The elaborate mechanism built on the theory of infinitely large samples is not accurate enough for simple laboratory data. Only by systematically tackling small sample problems on their merits does it seem possible to apply accurate tests to practical data.вҖҷвҖҷ Fisher was among the first to promote the work by W. S. Gosset ЕҪpseudonym вҖҳвҖҳStudentвҖҷвҖҷ. on the t distribution. The fifth edition of Statistical Methods for Research Workers ЕҪ1934. introduced FisherвҖҷs exact test for 2 = 2 contingency tables. In his 1935 book The Design of Experiments, Fisher described the tea-tasting experiment ЕҪSection 3.5.2. motivated by his experience at an afternoon tea break while employed at Rothamsted Experiment Station.
The mid-1930s finally saw some model building for categorical responses. Chester Bliss ЕҪ1934, 1935., following up a 1933 report on quantal response methods by J. H. Gaddum, popularized the probit model for applications in toxicology with a binary response. Bliss introduced the term probit but used the inverse normal cdf with mean 5 ЕҪrather than 0, in order to avoid negative values. and standard deviation 1. In the appendix of Bliss ЕҪ1935., Fisher ЕҪ1935b. outlined an algorithm for finding ML estimates of model parameters. That algorithm was a NewtonбҺҗRaphson type of method using expected information, today commonly called Fisher scoring ЕҪSection 4.6.2.. Stigler ЕҪ1986, p. 246. and Finney ЕҪ1971. attributed the first use of inverse normal cdf transformations of proportions to the German physicist Gustav Fechner in his 1860 book Elemente der Psychophysik. See Finney ЕҪ1971. and McCulloch ЕҪ2000. for other history of the probit method.
The definition for homogeneous association ЕҪno interaction. in contingency tables originated in an article by the British statistician Maurice Bartlett ЕҪ1935. about 2 = 2 = 2 tables. Bartlett showed how to find ML

624

HISTORICAL TOUR OF CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

estimates of cell probabilities satisfying the property of equality of odds ratios between two variables at each level of the third. He attributed the idea to Fisher.
In 1940, Fisher developed canonical correlation methods for contingency tables. He showed how to assign scores to rows and columns of a contingency table to maximize the correlation. His work relates to the later development,
particularly in France, of correspondence analysis methods ЕҪe.g., BenzВҙecri
1973.. R. A. Fisher has had the greatest influence on the practice of modern
statistical science. The biography by his daughter ЕҪBox 1978. gives a fascinating account of his impressive contributions to statistics and genetics. Fienberg ЕҪ1980. summarized his contributions to CDA.

16.3 LOGISTIC REGRESSION
Bartlett ЕҪ1937. used logw yrЕҪ1 y y.x in regression and ANOVA to transform observations y that are continuous proportions ЕҪProblem 6.33.. In a book of statistical tables published in 1938, R. A. Fisher and Frank Yates suggested it as a possible transformation of a binomial parameter for analyzing binary data. In 1944, the physician and statistician Joseph Berkson introduced the term logit for this transformation. Berkson showed that the model using the logit fitted similarly to the probit model, and his subsequent work did much to popularize logistic regression. In 1951, Jerome Cornfield, another statistician with strong medical ties, used the odds ratio to approximate relative risks in caseбҺҗcontrol studies. Dyke and Patterson ЕҪ1952. apparently first used the logit in models with qualitative predictors.
Sir David R. Cox introduced many statisticians to logistic regression, through his 1958 article and 1970 book, The Analysis of Binary Data. About the same time, an article by the Danish statistician and mathematician Georg Rasch sparked an enormous literature on item response models. The most important of these is the logit model with subject and item parameters, now called the Rasch model ЕҪSection 12.1.4.. This work was highly influential in the psychometric community of northern Europe ЕҪespecially in Denmark, the Netherlands, and Germany. and spurred many generalizations in the educational testing community in the United States.
The extension of logistic regression to multicategory responses received occasional attention before 1970 ЕҪe.g., Mantel 1966. but substantial work after about that date. For nominal responses, early work was mainly in the econometrics literature. See Bock ЕҪ1970., McFadden ЕҪ1974., Nerlove and Press ЕҪ1973., and Theil ЕҪ1969, 1970.. In 2000, Daniel McFadden won the Nobel Prize in Economics for his work in the 1970s and 1980s on the discrete-choice model ЕҪSection 7.6.. For cumulative logit models for ordinal responses, see Bock and Jones ЕҪ1968., Simon ЕҪ1974., Snell ЕҪ1964., Walker and Duncan ЕҪ1967., and Williams and Grizzle ЕҪ1972.. The cumulative probit case,

MULTIWAY CONTINGENCY TABLES AND LOGLINEAR MODELS

625

based on an underlying normal response, has a longer history; see, for instance, Aitchison and Silvey ЕҪ1957. and Bock and Jones ЕҪ1968, Chap. 8.. Cumulative logit and probit models received much more attention following publication of McCullagh ЕҪ1980., which provided a Fisher scoring algorithm for ML fitting of all cumulative link models.
The next major advances with logistic regression dealt with its application to caseбҺҗcontrol studies ЕҪe.g., Breslow 1996; Mantel 1973; Prentice 1976a; Prentice and Pyke 1979; see also Section 5.1.4. and the conditional ML approach to model fitting for those studies and others with numerous nuisance parameters ЕҪBreslow et al. 1978, with related work in Breslow 1976, 1982; Breslow and Day 1980; Breslow and Powers 1978; Cox 1970; Farewell 1979; Prentice 1976a; Prentice and Breslow 1978; Zelen 1971; see also Sections 6.7 and 10.2.. The conditional approach was later exploited in small-sample exact inference ЕҪHirji et al. 1987; Mehta and Patel 1995; see also Section 6.7..
Nathan Mantel, whose name appears in the preceding two paragraphs, made a variety of interesting contributions to CDA. Although best known for the 1959 MantelбҺҗHaenszel test and related odds ratio estimator, he also discussed trend tests ЕҪ1963., multinomial logit and loglinear modeling ЕҪ1966., logistic regression for caseбҺҗcontrol data ЕҪ1973., the number of contingency tables having fixed margins ЕҪGail and Mantel 1977., the analysis of square contingency tables ЕҪMantel and Byar 1978., and problems with minimum chi-squared and Wald tests ЕҪ1985, 1987a..
More recently, attention has focused on fitting logistic models to correlated responses for clustered data. One strand of this is marginal modeling of longitudinal data ЕҪDiggle et al. 2002; Liang and Zeger 1986; Liang et al. 1992.. Much of this literature focuses on quasi-likelihood methods such as generalized estimating equations ЕҪGEE.. Another strand is generalized linear mixed models ЕҪe.g., Breslow and Clayton 1993..
Perhaps the most far-reaching contribution of the past half century has been the introduction by British statisticians John Nelder and R. W. M. Wedderburn in 1972 of the concept of generalized linear models. This unifies the logistic and probit regression models for binomial data with loglinear models for Poisson data and with long-established regression and ANOVA models for normal-response data. Interestingly, the algorithm they used to fit GLMs is Fisher scoring, which R. A. Fisher introduced in 1935 for ML fitting of probit models. McCulloch ЕҪ2000. reviewed the journey from probit models to GLMs and their further generalizations such as quasi-likelihood.

16.4 MULTIWAY CONTINGENCY TABLES AND LOGLINEAR MODELS
The quarter century following the end of World War II saw the development
of a theoretical underpinning for models for contingency tables. H. CramВҙer

626

HISTORICAL TOUR OF CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

ЕҪ1946. derived general expressions for large-sample distributions of parameter estimators. C. R. Rao ЕҪ1957, 1963. conducted related work.
In 1949, the Berkeley-based statistician Jerzy Neyman, who had already performed fundamental work on hypothesis testing and interval estimation methods with E. S. Pearson, introduced the family of best asymptotically normal ЕҪBAN. estimators. These have the same optimal large-sample properties as ML estimators. The BAN family includes estimators obtained by minimizing chi-squared-type measures comparing observed proportions to proportions predicted by the model ЕҪSection 15.3.1.. This type of estimator itself includes some weighted least squares ЕҪWLS. estimators. The simplicity of their computation, compared to ML estimators, was an important consideration before the advent of modern computing. NeymanвҖҷs ЕҪ1949. only mention of Fisher was the suggestion that Fisher did not realize that estimators other than ML could be BAN, stating that вҖҳвҖҳthe results . . . contradict the assertion of R. A. Fisher, not a very clear one, that вҖҳthe maximum likelihood equation may indeed be derived from the conditions that it shall be linear in frequencies, and efficient for all values of вҗӘ вҖҷ.вҖҷвҖҷ Fisher, of course, returned the compliment: for instance, writing ЕҪ1956. about proposals for an unconditional test for 2 = 2 tables, вҖҳвҖҳthe Principles of Neyman and PearsonвҖҷs вҖҳTheory of Testing HypothesesвҖҷ are liable to mislead those who follow them into much wasted effort.вҖҷвҖҷ
In the early 1950s, William Cochran published work dealing with a variety of important topics in CDA. Scottish-born, Cochran spent most of his career at American universities: Iowa State, North Carolina State, Johns Hopkins, and Harvard. He ЕҪ1940. modeled Poisson and binomial responses with variance-stabilizing transformations. He ЕҪ1943. recognized and discussed ways of dealing with overdispersion. He ЕҪ1950. introduced a generalization ЕҪCochranвҖҷs Q. of McNemarвҖҷs test for comparing proportions in several matched samples. His classic 1954 article is a mixture of new methodology and advice for applied statisticians. It gave sample-size guidelines for chisquared approximations to work well for the X 2 statistic. It also stressed the importance of directing inferences toward narrow ЕҪe.g., single-degree-offreedom. alternatives and partitioning chi-squared statistics into components. One instance of this was CochranвҖҷs proposed test of conditional independence in several 2 = 2 tables, which was closely related to the Mantel and Haenszel ЕҪ1959. test ЕҪSection 6.3.2.. Another was a test for a linear trend in proportions across quantitatively defined rows of an I = 2 table ЕҪSection 5.3.5.. See also Cochran ЕҪ1955.. Fienberg ЕҪ1984. reviewed CochranвҖҷs contributions to CDA.
BartlettвҖҷs work on interaction structure in 2 = 2 = 2 contingency tables had relatively little impact for 20 years. Indeed, in presenting methods for partitioning X 2 in 2 = 2 = 2 tables, Lancaster ЕҪ1951. noted that вҖҳвҖҳDoubtless little use will ever be made of more than a three-dimensional classification.вҖҷвҖҷ However, in the mid-1950s and early 1960s, BartlettвҖҷs work was extended in many ways to multiway tables. See, for instance, Darroch ЕҪ1962., Good

MULTIWAY CONTINGENCY TABLES AND LOGLINEAR MODELS

627

ЕҪ1963., Goodman ЕҪ1964b., Plackett ЕҪ1962., Roy and Kastenbaum ЕҪ1956., and Roy and Mitra ЕҪ1956.. These articles as well as influential articles by Martin W. Birch ЕҪ1963, 1964a, b, 1965. were the genesis of research work on loglinear models between about 1965 and 1975. BirchвҖҷs work was part of a never-submitted Ph.D. thesis at the University of Glasgow. He showed how to obtain ML estimates of cell probabilities in three-way tables, under various conditions. He showed the equivalence of those ML estimates for Poisson and multinomial sampling. He ЕҪand Watson 1959. extended theoretical
results of CramВҙer and Rao on large-sample distributions for contingency
table models. Mantel ЕҪ1966. discussed early results and made the loglinear model formula explicit. A survey article by the French statistician Henri Caussinus ЕҪ1966., based partly on his Ph.D. thesis, provides a good glimpse of the state-of-the-art of CDA just before this decade of advances. There, Caussinus introduced the quasi-symmetry model for square tables.
Much of the work in the next decades on loglinear and related logit modeling took place at three American universities: the University of Chicago, Harvard University, and the University of North Carolina. At Chicago, Leo Goodman wrote a series of groundbreaking articles, dealing with such topics as partitionings of chi-squared, models for square tables ЕҪe.g., quasi-independence., stepwise logit and loglinear model-building procedures, deriving asymptotic variances of ML estimates of loglinear parameters, latent class models, association models, correlation models, and correspondence analysis. For surveys of his early work, see Goodman ЕҪ1968, an R. A. Fisher memorial lecture, 1970.. For later work, see Goodman ЕҪ1985, 1996, 2000.. Goodman also wrote a stream of articles for social science journals that had a substantial impact on popularizing loglinear and logit methods for applications ЕҪe.g., Goodman 1969b..
Over the past 50 years, Goodman has been the most prolific contributor to the advancement of CDA methodology. The field owes tremendous gratitude to his steady and impressive body of work. In addition, some of GoodmanвҖҷs students at Chicago also made fundamental contributions. In 1970, Shelby Haberman completed a Ph.D. dissertation ЕҪthe basis of his 1974a monograph. making substantial theoretical contributions to loglinear modeling. Among topics he considered were residual analyses, existence of ML estimates, loglinear models for ordinal variables, and theoretical results for models ЕҪsuch as the Rasch model. for which the number of parameters grows with the sample size. Clifford Clogg followed in GoodmanвҖҷs steps by having influence in the social sciences and in statistics with his work on association models, demography, models for rates, the census, and various other topics.
Simultaneously with GoodmanвҖҷs work, related research on ML methods for loglinear-logit models occurred at Harvard by students of Frederick Mosteller ЕҪsuch as Stephen Fienberg. and William Cochran. Much of this research was inspired by problems arising in analyzing large, multivariate data sets in the National Halothane Study ЕҪBishop and Mosteller 1969; see also p. 345 of an interview with Lincoln Moses in Statist. Sci. 14, 1999.. That

628

HISTORICAL TOUR OF CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

Publisher's Note: Permission to reproduce this image online was not granted by the copyright holder. Readers are kindly asked to refer to the printed version of this chapter.

FIGURE 16.1 Four leading figures in the development of categorical data analysis.

RECENT ЕҪAND FUTURE?. DEVELOPMENTS

629

study investigated whether halothane was more likely than other anesthetics to cause death due to liver damage. A presidential address by Mosteller ЕҪ1968. to the American Statistical Association described early uses of loglinear models for smoothing multidimensional discrete data sets. Fienberg and his own students advanced this work further. A landmark book in 1975 by him with Yvonne Bishop and Paul Holland, Discrete MultiВ®ariate Analysis, was largely responsible for introducing loglinear models to the general statistical community and remains an excellent reference.
Research at North Carolina by Gary Koch and several students and co-workers has been highly influential in the biomedical sciences. Their research developed WLS methods for categorical data models ЕҪSection 15.1.. The 1969 article by Koch with J. Grizzle and F. Starmer popularized this approach. Koch and colleagues extended it in later articles to an impressive variety of problems, including problems for which ML methods are awkward to use, such as the analysis of repeated categorical measurement data ЕҪKoch et al. 1977.. In 1966, Vasant Bhapkar showed that the WLS estimator is often identical to NeymanвҖҷs minimum modified chi-squared estimator.
The early literature on loglinear models treated all classifications as nominal. Haberman ЕҪ1974b. and Simon ЕҪ1974. showed how to exploit ordinality of classifications in loglinear models. This work was extended in several articles by Leo Goodman ЕҪ1979a, 1981a, b, 1983, 1985, 1986.. The extensions included association models, which replace ordered scores in loglinear models by parameters ЕҪSection 9.5.. Goodman ЕҪ1985, 1986, 1996. also discussed related correlation models and provided a model-based perspective for the closely related correspondence analysis methods.
Certain loglinear models with conditional independence structure provide graphical models for contingency tables. These relate to the association graphs used in Section 9.1. Darroch et al. ЕҪ1980. was the genesis of much of this work.

16.5 RECENT (AND FUTURE?) DEVELOPMENTS
The most active area of new research in CDA in the past decade has been the modeling of clustered data, such as occur in longitudinal studies and other forms of repeated measurement. A variety of ways now exist of modeling while accounting for the correlation among responses in the same cluster.
As discussed in Chapters 11 and 12, ML estimation is difficult for such models. For complex forms of generalized linear mixed models, for instance, it is a challenge to estimate well regression parameters and variance components. Integrating out the random effect to obtain the likelihood function requires an approximation such as numerical integration. Not surprisingly, various Monte Carlo approaches are applied increasingly here. A promising

630

HISTORICAL TOUR OF CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

approach is a Monte Carlo EM algorithm that uses a Monte Carlo approximation for the E step ЕҪBooth and Hobert 1999.. The Monte Carlo error can be assessed at each iteration, and one can accurately reproduce the ML estimates with sufficiently many iterations.
The modeling of clustered correlated data is likely to be an active area of research in coming years. The class of generalized linear mixed models is certain to see substantial work and further generalization. One extension is generalized additiВ®e mixed models. Time-series models for categorical responses have so far received relatively little attention. For all such models with correlated responses, model diagnostics are of vital importance and need development. For longitudinal data, missing data are a common problem. This area currently has much activity.
Another important recent advance is the development of efficient algorithms for exact small-sample methods. With such methods, one can guarantee that the size of a test is no greater than some prespecified level and that the coverage probability for a confidence interval is at least the nominal level. The вҖҳвҖҳexactnessвҖҷвҖҷ refers only to inference being based on probability distributions that do not depend on unknown parameters. There is no unique way to do this, and certain methods can be highly conservative because of discreteness. Most literature deals with the conditional approach, which eliminates nuisance parameters by conditioning on their sufficient statistics. Hence, the basic idea builds on FisherвҖҷs exact test. Conditional methods are versatile, applying to exponential family linear models that use the canonical link function, such as loglinear models for Poisson responses and logit models for binomial responses. Many of the computational advances with the exact conditional approach occurred in a series of articles by Cyrus Mehta, Nitin Patel, and colleagues at Harvard ЕҪe.g., Mehta and Patel 1983., using the network algorithm. See surveys by Agresti ЕҪ1992., Mehta ЕҪ1994., Mehta and Patel ЕҪ1995., and the StatXact and LogXact manuals ЕҪCytel Software, Cambridge, MA, founded by Mehta and Patel..
Although the development of вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ methods has seen considerable progress, certain analyses are still infeasible and likely to be so for some time because of the exponential increase in computing time as the table size or sample size increases. There are an ever-increasing variety of methods for accurate approximation of exact methods. These include simple Monte Carlo ЕҪe.g., Agresti et al. 1979., Monte Carlo with importance sampling ЕҪe.g., Booth and Butler 1999; Mehta et al. 1988., Markov chain Monte Carlo ЕҪMCMC; Forster et al. 1996., saddlepoint approximations ЕҪPierce and Peters 1992, Strawderman and Wells 1998., and related work on an approximate conditioning approach ЕҪPierce and Peters 1999. in which discreteness is not so problematic.
Finally, the development of Bayesian approaches to CDA is an increasingly active area. The multiplicity of parameters complicates Bayesian modeling. For early use of Bayesian estimation of probabilities, see Good ЕҪ1965. and Lindley ЕҪ1964.. GoodвҖҷs ЕҪ1965. article apparently evolved from his work

RECENT ЕҪAND FUTURE?. DEVELOPMENTS

631

during World War II with Alan Turing at Bletchley Park, England, on breaking Nazi codes. The development of the Bayesian approach for CDA is discussed in Section 15.2.3.
Predicting the future is always dangerous. However, it is likely that much future research will focus on computationally intensive methods such as generalized linear mixed models. Another hot topic, largely outside the realm of traditional modeling, is the development of algorithmic methods for huge data sets with large numbers of variables. Such methods, often referred to as data mining, deal with the handling of complex data structures, with a premium on predictive power at the sacrifice of simplicity and interpretability of structure. Important areas of application include genetics, such as the analysis of discrete DNA sequences in the form of very high-dimensional contingency tables, and business applications such as credit scoring and tree-structured methods for predicting future behavior of customers.
Sources for the historical tour in this chapter include Stigler ЕҪ1986., Studies in the History of Probability and Statistics, edited by E. S. Pearson and M. G. Kendall ЕҪLondon: Griffin, 1970., and personal conversations over the years with several statisticians, including Erling Andersen, R. L. Anderson, Henri Caussinus, William Cochran, Sir David Cox, John Darroch, Leo Goodman, Gary Koch, Frederick Mosteller, John Nelder, C. R. Rao, Stephen Stigler, Geoffrey Watson, and Marvin Zelen. To readers who have made it this far, I congratulate your perseverance! To develop a more complete understanding of the historical development of CDA, you may want to study the following chronological list of 25 sources. These convey a sense of how methodology has evolved. Alternatively, look at some early books on this topic, such as A. E. MaxwellвҖҷs Analysing QualitatiВ®e Data ЕҪNew York: Methuen, 1961., R. L. PlackettвҖҷs The Analysis of Categorical Data ЕҪLondon: Griffin, 1974., and the Bishop, Fienberg, and Holland Discrete MultiВ®ariate Analysis ЕҪCambridge, MA: MIT Press 1975..

Pearson ЕҪ1900. Yule ЕҪ1912. Fisher ЕҪ1922. Bartlett ЕҪ1935. Berkson ЕҪ1944. Neyman ЕҪ1949. Cochran ЕҪ1954. Goodman and Kruskal ЕҪ1954. Roy and Mitra ЕҪ1956. Cox ЕҪ1958a. Mantel and Haenszel ЕҪ1959. Birch ЕҪ1963. Birch ЕҪ1964b.

Caussinus ЕҪ1966. Goodman ЕҪ1968. Mosteller ЕҪ1968. Grizzle et al. ЕҪ1969. Goodman ЕҪ1970. Haberman ЕҪ1974a. Nelder and Wedderburn ЕҪ1972. McFadden ЕҪ1974. Goodman ЕҪ1979a. McCullagh ЕҪ1980. Liang and Zeger ЕҪ1986. Breslow and Clayton ЕҪ1993.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
APPENDIX A
Using Computer Software to Analyze Categorical Data
In this appendix we discuss statistical software for categorical data analysis, with emphasis on SAS. We begin by mentioning major software that can perform the analyses discussed in this book. Then we illustrate, by chapter, SAS code for the analyses. Information about other packages ЕҪsuch as S-Plus, R, SPSS, and Stata., as well as updated information about SAS, is at the Web site ЕҪwww. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html.. Section A.2 on SAS also lists other software for analyses not currently available in SAS.
A.1 SOFTWARE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS
A.1.1 SAS SAS is general-purpose software for a wide variety of statistical analyses. The main procedures ЕҪPROCs. for categorical data analyses are FREQ, GENMOD, LOGISTIC, NLMIXED, and CATMOD.
PROC FREQ computes measures of association and their estimated standard errors. It also performs generalized CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel tests of conditional independence, and exact tests of independence in I = J tables.
PROC GENMOD fits generalized linear models. It fits cumulative link models for ordinal responses. It can perform GEE analyses for marginal models. One can form oneвҖҷs own variance function and allow scale parameters, making it suitable for quasi-likelihood analyses.
PROC LOGISTIC gives ML fitting of binary response models, cumulative link models for ordinal responses, and baseline-category logit models for nominal responses. It incorporates model selection procedures, regression diagnostic options, and exact conditional inference. PROC PROBIT also conducts ML fitting of binary and cumulative link models as well as quantal
632

SOFTWARE FOR CATEGORICAL DATA ANALYSIS

633

response models that permit a strictly positive probability as the linear predictor decreases to yПұ.
PROC CATMOD fits baseline-category logit models. It is also useful for WLS fitting of a wide variety of models for categorical data.
PROC NLMIXED fits generalized linear mixed models ЕҪGLMMs.. It approximates the likelihood using adaptive GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature.
Other programs run on SAS that are not specifically supported by the SAS Institute. For further details about SAS for categorical data analyses, see the very helpful guide by Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000.. Also useful are SAS publications on logistic regression ЕҪAllison 1999. and graphics ЕҪFriendly 2000..

A.1.2 Other Software Packages
Most major statistical software has procedures for categorical data analyses. For instance, see SPSS ЕҪSPSS Regression Models 10.0 by M. J. Norusis, SPSS Inc., 1999., Stata ЕҪ A Handbook of Statistical Analyses Using Stata, 2nd ed., by S. Rabe-Hesketh and B. Everitt, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2000., S-Plus ЕҪ Modern Applied Statistics with S-Plus, 3rd ed., by W. N. Venables and B. D. Ripley, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999., and the related free package, R, and GLIM ЕҪAitkin et al. 1989.. Most major software now follows the lead of GLIM and includes a generalized linear models routine. Examples are PROC GENMOD in SAS and the glm function in R and S-Plus.
For certain analyses, specialized software is better than the major packages. A good example is StatXact ЕҪCytel Software, Cambridge, Massachusetts., which provides exact analysis for categorical data methods and some nonparametric methods. Among its procedures are small-sample confidence intervals for differences and ratios of proportions and for odds ratios, and FisherвҖҷs exact test and its generalizations for I = J tables. It can also conduct exact tests of conditional independence and of equality of odds ratios in 2 = 2 = K tables, and exact confidence intervals for the common odds ratio in several 2 = 2 tables. StatXact uses Monte Carlo methods to approximate exact P-values and confidence intervals when a data set is too large for exact inference to be computationally feasible. Its companion, LogXact, performs exact conditional logistic regression.
Other examples of specialized software are SUDAAN for GEE-type analyses that handle clustering in survey data ЕҪResearch Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina., Latent GOLD for latent class modeling ЕҪStatistical Innovations, Belmont, Massachusetts., MLn ЕҪInstitute of Education, London. and HLM ЕҪScientific Software, Chicago. for multilevel models, and PASS for power analyses ЕҪNCSS Statistical Software, Kaysville, Utah.. S-Plus and R functions are also available from individuals or from published work for particular analyses. For instance, Statistical Models in S by J. M. Chambers and T. J. Hastie ЕҪWadsworth, Belmont, California, 1993, p. 227. showed the use of S-Plus in quasi-likelihood analyses using the quasi and make.family functions.

634

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.1 SAS Code for Chi-Squared, Measures of Association, and Residuals for EducationвҖ“Religion Data in Table 3.2

data table;

input degree religion $ count @@;

datalines;

1 fund 178

1 mod 138

1 lib 108

2 fund 570

2 mod 648

2 lib 442

3 fund 138

3 mod 252

3 lib 252

;

proc freq order = data; weight count;

tables degree*religion/ chisq expected measures cmh1;

proc genmod order = data; class degree religion;

model count = degree religion / dist = poi link = log residuals;

A.2 EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER
The examples below show SAS code ЕҪVersion 8.1.. We focus on basic model fitting rather than the great variety of options. The material is organized by chapter of presentation. For convenience, data for examples are entered in the form of the contingency table displayed in the text. In practice, one would usually enter data at the subject level. These tables and the full data sets are available at www. stat.ufl.edur;aarcdarcda.html.
Chapters 1вҖ“3: Introduction, Two-Way Contingency Tables
Table A.1 uses SAS to analyze Table 3.2. The @@ symbol indicates that each line of data contains more than one observation. Input of a variable as characters rather than numbers requires an accompanying $ label in the INPUT statement. PROC FREQ forms the table with the TABLES statement, ordering row and column categories alphanumerically. To use instead the order in which the categories appear in the data set ЕҪe.g., to treat the variable properly in an ordinal analysis., use the ORDER s DATA option in the PROC statement. The WEIGHT statement is needed when one enters the cell counts instead of subject-level data. PROC FREQ can conduct chi-squared tests of independence ЕҪCHISQ option., show its estimated expected frequencies ЕҪEXPECTED., provide a wide assortment of measures of association and their standard errors ЕҪMEASURES., and provide ordinal statistic ЕҪ3.15. with a вҖҳвҖҳnonzero correlationвҖҷвҖҷ test ЕҪCMH1.. One can also perform chi-squared tests using PROC GENMOD ЕҪusing loglinear models discussed in the Chapters 8бҺҗ9 section of this appendix., as shown. Its RESIDUALS option provides cell residuals. The output labeled вҖҳвҖҳStReschiвҖҷвҖҷ is the standardized Pearson residual ЕҪ3.13..
Table A.2 analyzes Table 3.8. With PROC FREQ, for 2 = 2 tables the MEASURES option in the TABLES statement provides confidence intervals

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

635

TABLE A.2 SAS Code for FisherвҖҷs Exact Test and Confidence Intervals for Odds Ratio for Tea-Tasting Data in Table 3.8
data fisher; input poured guess count @@; datalines; 113 121 211 223 ; proc freq; weight count;
tables poured*guess / measures riskdiff; exact fisher or / alpha = .05; proc logistic descending; freq count; model guess = poured / clodds = pl;

for the odds ratio ЕҪlabeled вҖҳвҖҳcase-controlвҖҷвҖҷ on output. and the relative risk, and the RISKDIFF option provides intervals for the proportions and their difference. For tables having small cell counts, the EXACT statement can provide various exact analyses. These include FisherвҖҷs exact test and its generalization for I = J tables, treating variables as nominal, with keyword FISHER. The OR keyword gives the odds ratio and its large-sample confidence interval ЕҪ3.2. and the small-sample interval based on ЕҪ3.20.. Other EXACT statement keywords include binomial tests for 1 = 2 tables ЕҪkeyword BINOMIAL., exact trend tests for I = 2 tables ЕҪTREND., and exact chisquared tests ЕҪCHISQ. and exact correlation tests for I = J tables ЕҪMHCHI.. One can use Monte Carlo simulation ЕҪoption MC. to estimate exact P-values when the exact calculation is too time consuming. Table A.2 also uses PROC LOGISTIC to get a profile-likelihood confidence interval for the odds ratio ЕҪCLODDS s PL.. LOGISTIC uses FREQ to serve the same purpose as PROC FREQ uses WEIGHT.
Other StatXact provides small-sample confidence intervals for a binomial parameter, the difference of proportions, relative risk, and odds ratio. Blaker ЕҪ2000. gave S-Plus functions that provide his confidence interval for a binomial parameter.

Chapter 4: Models for Binary Response Variables
PROC GENMOD fits GLMs. It specifies the response distribution in the DIST option ЕҪвҖҳвҖҳpoiвҖҷвҖҷ for Poisson, вҖҳвҖҳbinвҖҷвҖҷ for binomial, вҖҳвҖҳmultвҖҷвҖҷ for multinomial, вҖҳвҖҳnegbinвҖҷвҖҷ for negative binomial. and specifies the link in the LINK option. Table A.3 illustrates for Table 4.2. For binomial models with grouped data, the response in the model statements takes the form of the number of вҖҳвҖҳsuccessesвҖҷвҖҷ divided by the number of cases.

636

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.3 SAS Code for Binary GLMs for Snoring Data in Table 4.2
data glm; input snoring disease total @@; datalines; 0 24 1379 2 35 638 4 21 213 5 30 254 ; proc genmod; model disease / total = snoring / dist = bin link = identity; proc genmod; model disease / total = snoring / dist = bin link = logit; proc genmod; model disease / total = snoring / dist = bin link = probit;

TABLE A.4 SAS Code for Poisson and Negative Binomial GLMs for Horseshoe Crab Data in Table 4.3
data crab; input color spine width satell weight; datalines; 3 3 28.3 8 3.05 4 3 22.5 0 1.55 РёРёРё 3 2 24.5 0 2.00 ; proc genmod;
model satell = width / dist = poi link = log; proc genmod;
model satell = width / dist = poi link = identity; proc genmod;
model satell = width / dist = negbin link = identity;

Table A.4 uses GENMOD for count modeling of Table 4.3. Each observation refers to a single crab. Using width as the predictor, the first two models use Poisson regression. The third model uses the identity link assuming a negative binomial distribution.
Table A.5 uses GENMOD for the overdispersed data of Table 4.5. A CLASS statement requests dummy variables for the groups. With no intercept in the model ЕҪoption NOINT. for the identity link, the estimated parameters are the four group probabilities. The ESTIMATE statement provides an estimate, confidence interval, and test for a contrast of model parameters, in this case the difference in probabilities for the first and second groups. The second analysis uses the Pearson statistic to scale standard errors to adjust for overdispersion. PROC LOGISTIC can also provide overdispersion modeling of binary responses; see Table A.27 in the Chapter 13 part of this appendix.
PROC GAM ЕҪstarting in Version 8.2. fits generalized additive models.

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

637

TABLE A.5 SAS Code for Overdispersion Modeling of Teratology Data in Table 4.5

data moore;

input litter group n y @@;

datalines;

1 1 10 1 РёРёРё

2 1 11 4

3 1 12 9 4 1 4 4 5 1 10 10

55 4 14 1 56 4 8 0 58 4 17 0

;

proc genmod; class group;

model y/n = group / dist = bin link = identity noint;

estimate вҖҳpi1- pi2 вҖҷ group 1 -1 0 0;

proc genmod; class group;

model y/n = group / dist = bin link = identity noint scale = pearson;

Chapters 5 and 6: Logistic Regression
One can fit logistic regression models using either software for GLMs or specialized software for logistic regression. PROC GENMOD uses NewtonRaphson, whereas PROC LOGISTIC uses Fisher scoring. Both yield ML estimates, but SE values use observed information in GENMOD and expected information in LOGISTIC. These are the same for the logit link.
Table A.6 applies GENMOD and LOGISTIC to Table 5.2, when вҖҳвҖҳ yвҖҷвҖҷ out of вҖҳвҖҳnвҖҷвҖҷ crabs had satellites at a given width level. In GENMOD, the LRCI option provides profile likelihood confidence intervals. The ALPHA s option can specify an error probability other than the default of 0.05. The TYPE3 option provides likelihood-ratio tests for each parameter. ЕҪIn the Chapter 8бҺҗ9 section we discuss the second GENMOD analysis..
TABLE A.6 SAS Code for Modeling Grouped Crab Data in Table 5.2
data crab; input width y n satell; logcases = log(n); datalines; 22.69 5 14 14 РёРёРё 30.41 14 14 72 ; proc genmod;
model y/n = width / dist = bin link = logit 1rci alpha = .01 type3; proc logistic;
model y/n = width / influence stb; output out = predict p = piбҺҗhat lower = LCL upper = UCL; proc print data = predict; proc genmod; model satell = width / dist = poi link = log offset = logcases residuals;

638

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.7 SAS Code for Logit Modeling of AIDS Data in Table 5.5
data aids; input race $ azt $ y n @@; datalines;
White Yes 14 107 White No 32 113 Black Yes 11 63 Black No 12 55 ; proc genmod; class race azt;
model y/n = azt race / dist = bin type3 lrci residuals obstats; proc logistic; class race azt / param = reference;
model y/n = azt race / aggregate scale = none clparm = both clodds = both; output out = predict p = piбҺҗhat lower = lower upper = upper; proc print data = predict; proc logistic; class race azt (ref = first) / param = ref; model y/n = azt / aggregate = (azt race) scale = none;

With PROC LOGISTIC, logistic regression is the default for binary data. LOGISTIC has a built-in check of whether logistic regression ML estimates exist. It can detect a complete separation of data points with 0 and 1 outcomes. LOGISTIC can also apply other links, such as the probit. Its INFLUENCE option provides Pearson and deviance residuals and diagnostic measures ЕҪPregibon 1981.. The STB option provides standardized estimates
by multiplying by sxj'3 rвҗІ ЕҪSection 5.4.7 and Note 5.9.. Following the model
statement, Table A.6 requests predicted probabilities and lower and upper 95% confidence limits for the probabilities.
Table A.7 uses GENMOD and LOGISTIC to fit a logit model with qualitative predictors to Table 5.5. In GENMOD, the OBSTATS option provides various вҖҳвҖҳobservation statistics,вҖҷвҖҷ including predicted values and their confidence limits. The RESIDUALS option requests residuals such as the Pearson and standardized Pearson residuals ЕҪlabeled вҖҳвҖҳReschiвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳStReschiвҖҷвҖҷ.. A CLASS statement requests dummy variables for the factor. By default, in GENMOD the parameter estimate for the last level of each factor equals 0. In LOGISTIC, estimates sum to zero. That is, dummies take the effect coding ЕҪ1, y1. of 1 when in the category and y1 when not, for which parameters sum to 0. In the CLASS statement in LOGISTIC, the option PARAM s REF requests ЕҪ1, 0. dummy variables with the last category as the reference level. Also putting REF s FIRST next to a variable name requests its first category as the reference level. The CLPARM s BOTH and CLODDS s BOTH options provide Wald and profile likelihood confidence intervals for parameters and odds ratio effects of explanatory variables. With AGGREGATE SCALE s NONE in the model statement, LOGISTIC reports Pearson and deviance tests of fit; it forms groups by aggregating data into the possible combinations of explanatory variable values, without overdispersion adjustments. Adding variables in parentheses after AGGREGATE ЕҪas in the second use of LOGISTIC in Table A.7. specifies the predictors used for forming the table on which to test fit, even when some predictors may have no effect in the model.

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

639

TABLE A.8 SAS Code for Logistic Regression Models with Horseshoe Crab Data in Table 4.3
data crab; input color spine width satell weight; if satell>0 then y = 1; if satell = 0 then y = 0; if color = 4 then light = 0; if color<4 then light = 1; datalines; 2 3 28.3 8 3.05 РёРёРё 2 2 24.5 0 2.00 ; proc genmod descending; class color;
model y = width color / dist = bin link = logit lrci type3 obstats; contrast вҖҷa- dвҖҷ color 1 0 0 -1; proc genmod descending; model y = width color / dist = bin link = logit; proc genmod descending; model y = width light / dist = bin link = logit; proc genmod descending; class color spine; model y = width weight color spine / dist = bin link = logit type3; proc logistic descending; class color spine / param = ref; model y = width weight color spine / selection = backward lackfit
outroc = classif1; proc plot data = classif1; plot бҺҗsensitбҺҗ*бҺҗlmspecбҺҗ ;

Table A.8 shows logistic regression analyses for Table 4.3. The models refer to a constructed binary variable Y that equals 1 when a horseshoe crab has satellites and 0 otherwise. With binary data entry, GENMOD and LOGISTIC order the levels alphanumerically, forming the logit with ЕҪ1, 0. responses as logw PЕҪY s 0.rPЕҪY s 1.x. Invoking the procedure with DESCENDING following the PROC name reverses the order. The first two GENMOD statements use both color and width as predictors; color is qualitative in the first model ЕҪby the CLASS statement. and quantitative in the second. A CONTRAST statement tests contrasts of parameters, such as whether parameters for two levels of a factor are identical. The statement shown contrasts the first and fourth color levels. The third GENMOD statement uses a dummy variable for color, indicating whether a crab is light or dark ЕҪcolor s 4.. The fourth GENMOD statement fits the main effects model using all the predictors from Table 4.3. LOGISTIC has options for stepwise selection of variables, as the final model statement shows. The LACKFIT option yields the HosmerбҺҗLemeshow statistic. Using the OUTROC option, LOGISTIC can output a data set for plotting a ROC curve.
Table A.9 analyzes Table 6.9. The CMH option in PROC FREQ specifies the CMH statistic, the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimate of a common odds ratio and its confidence interval, and the BreslowбҺҗDay statistic. FREQ uses the

640

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.9 SAS Code for CMH Analysis of Clinical Trial Data in Table 6.9

data crab;

input center $ treat response count @@ ;

datalines;

a 1 1 11 РёРёРё

a 1 2 25

a 2 1 10

a2

h114 h122 h216 h2

;

proc freq; weight count;

tables center*treat*response/ cmh chisq;

2 27 21

two rightmost variables in the TABLES statement as the rows and columns for each partial table; the CHISQ option yields chi-square tests of independence for each partial table. For I = 2 tables the TREND keyword in the TABLES statement provides the CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test.
Exact conditional logistic regression is available in PROC LOGISTIC with the EXACT statement. It provides ordinary and mid-P-values as well as confidence limits for each model parameter and the corresponding odds ratio with the ESTIMATE s BOTH option. One can also conduct the exact conditional version of the CochranбҺҗArmitage test using the TREND option in the EXACT statement with PROC FREQ. Version 9 of SAS will include asymptotic conditional logistic regression, using a STRATA statement to indicate the stratification parameters to be conditioned out. One can also use PROC PHREG to do this ЕҪStokes et al. 2000..
Models with probit and complementary log-log ЕҪCLOGLOG. links are available with PROC GENMOD, PROC LOGISTIC, or PROC PROBIT. OвҖҷBrien ЕҪ1986. gave a SAS macro for computing powers using the noncentral chi-squared distribution.
Other LogXact provides exact conditional logistic regression and StatXact provides exact inference about the odds ratio in 2 = 2 = K tables. PASS ЕҪNCSS Statistical Software. provides power analyses.
Chapter 7: Multinomial Response Models PROC LOGISTIC fits baseline-category logit models ЕҪas of Version 8.2. using the LINK s GLOGIT option. The final response category is the default baseline for the logits. Exact inference is also available using the conditional distribution to eliminate nuisance parameters. PROC CATMOD also fits baseline-category logit models, as Table A.10 shows. CATMOD codes estimates for a factor so that they sum to zero. The PRED s PROB and PRED s FREQ options provide predicted probabilities and fitted values and their standard errors. The POPULATION statement provides the

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

641

TABLE A.10 SAS Code for Baseline-Category Logit Models with Alligator Data in Table 7.1
data gator; input lake gender size food count @@; datalines; 11117 11121 11130 11140 11155 РёРёРё 42218 42221 42230 42240 42251 ; proc logistic; freq count; class lake size / param = ref;
model food(ref = вҖҷ1 вҖҷ) = lake size / link = glogit aggregate scale = none;
proc catmod; weight count; population lake size gender; model food = lake size / pred = freq pred = prob;

variables that define the predictor settings. For instance, with вҖҳвҖҳgenderвҖҷвҖҷ in that statement, the model with lake and size effects is fitted to the full table also classified by gender.
PROC GENMOD can fit the proportional odds version of cumulative logit models using the DIST s MULTINOMIAL and LINK s CLOGIT options. Table A.11 fits it to Table 7.5. When the number of response categories exceeds 2, by default PROC LOGISTIC fits this model. It also gives a score test of the proportional odds assumption of identical effect parameters for each cutpoint. Both procedures use the вҗЈj q вҗӨ x form of the model. Cox ЕҪ1995. used PROC NLIN for the more general model ЕҪ7.8. having a scale parameter.
Both GENMOD and LOGISTIC can use other links in cumulative link models. GENMOD uses LINK s CPROBIT for the cumulative probit model and LINK s CCLL for the cumulative complementary log-log model. Table A.11 uses LINK s PROBIT in LOGISTIC to fit a cumulative probit model.

TABLE A.11 SAS Code for Cumulative Logit and Probit Models with Mental Impairment Data in Table 7.5

data impair; input mental ses life; datalines; 111 РёРёРё 409 ; proc genmod ;
model mental = life ses / dist = multinomial proc logistic;
model mental = life ses / link = probit;

link = clogit

lrci

type3;

642

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.12 SAS Code for Adjacent-Categories Logit and Mean Response Models and CMH Analysis of Job Satisfaction Data in Table 7.8
data jobsat; input gender income satisf count @@; count2 = count + .01; datalines; 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 1 3 11 1 1 4 2 ... 0410 0421 043 9 0446 ; proc catmod order = data; * ML analysis of adj- cat logit (ACL) model;
weight count; population gender income; model satisf =
(1 0 0 3 3, 0 1 0 2 2, 0 0 1 1 1, 1 0 0 6 3, 0 1 0 4 2, 0 0 1 2 1, 1 0 0 9 3, 0 1 0 6 2, 0 0 1 3 1, 1 0 0 12 3, 0 1 0 8 2, 0 0 1 4 1, 1 0 0 3 0, 0 1 0 2 0, 0 0 1 1 0, 1 0 0 6 0, 0 1 0 4 0, 0 0 1 2 0, 1 0 0 9 0, 0 1 0 6 0, 0 0 1 3 0, 1 0 0 12 0, 0 1 0 8 0, 0 0 1 4 0) /ml pred = freq;
proc catmod order = data; weight count2; * WLS analysis of ACL model; response alogits; population gender income; direct gender income; model satisf = бҺҗresponseбҺҗ gender income;
proc catmod; weight count; * mean response model; population gender income; response mean; direct gender income; model satisf = gender income / covb;
proc freq; weight count; tables gender*income*satisf/ cmh scores = table;

One can fit adjacent-categories logit models in CATMOD by fitting equivalent baseline-category logit models. Table A.12 uses it for Table 7.8, where each line of code in the model statement specifies the predictor values ЕҪfor the three intercepts, income, and gender. for the three logits. The income and gender predictor values are multiplied by 3 for the first logit, 2 for the second, and 1 for the third, to make effects comparable in the two models. PROC CATMOD has options ЕҪCLOGITS and ALOGITS. for fitting cumulative logit and adjacent-categories logit models to ordinal responses; however, those options provide weighted least squares ЕҪWLS. rather than ML fits. A constant must be added to empty cells for WLS to run. CATMOD treats zero counts as structural zeros, so they must be replaced by small constants when they are actually sampling zeros. The DIRECT statements identify predictors treated as quantitative. The second analysis in Table A.12 uses the ALOGITS option. CATMOD can also fit mean response models using WLS, as the third analysis in Table A.12 shows.
With the CMH option, PROC FREQ provides the generalized CMH tests of conditional independence. The statistic for the вҖҳвҖҳgeneral associationвҖҷвҖҷ

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

643

alternative treats X and Y as nominal wstatistic ЕҪ7.20.x, the statistic for the вҖҳвҖҳrow mean scores differвҖҷвҖҷ alternative treats X as nominal and Y as ordinal, and the statistic for the вҖҳвҖҳnonzero correlationвҖҷвҖҷ alternative treats X and Y as ordinal wstatistic ЕҪ7.21.x. Table A.12 analyzes Table 7.8, using scores ЕҪ1, 2, 3, 4. for each variable.
PROC MDC fits multinomial discrete choice models, with logit and probit links. One can also use PROC PHREG, which is designed for the Cox proportional hazards model for survival analysis, because the partial likelihood for that analysis has the same form as the likelihood for the multinomial model ЕҪAllison 1999, Chap. 7; Chen and Kuo 2001..

Other LogXact provides exact conditional analyses for baseline-category logit models. Joseph Lang ЕҪ jblang@stat.uiowa.edu. has an R function that can fit mean response models by ML.

Chapters 8 and 9: Loglinear Models
Table A.13 uses GENMOD to fit model ЕҪ AC, AM, CM . to Table 8.3. Table A.14 uses GENMOD for table raking of Table 8.15. Table A.15 uses GENMOD to fit the linear-by-linear association model ЕҪ9.6. and the row effects model ЕҪ9.8. to Table 9.3 ЕҪwith column scores 1, 2, 4, 5.. The defined

TABLE A.13 SAS Code for Fitting Loglinear Models to Drug Survey Data in Table 8.3

data drugs; input a c m count @@; datalines; 1 1 1 911 1 1 2 538 1 2 1 44 1 2 2 2 1 1 3 2 1 2 43 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 ; proc genmod; class a c m;
model count = a c m a*m a*c c*m / dist = poi

456 279
link = log

lrci

type3

obstats;

TABLE A.14 SAS Code for Raking Table 8.15

data rake;

input school atti count @@;

logбҺҗc = log(count); pseudo = 100 / 3;

data lines;

1 1 209 РёРёРё

1 2 101

1 3 237

;

proc genmod; class school atti;

model pseudo = school atti / dist = poi

link = log

offset = logбҺҗc

obstats;

644

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.15 SAS Code for Fitting Association Models to GSS Data in Table 9.3

data sex;

input premar birth u v count @@; assoc = u*v ;

datalines;

1 1 1 1 38 РёРёРё

1 2 1 2 60

1 3 1 4 68

1 4 1 5 81

;

proc genmod; class premar birth;

model count = premar birth assoc / dist = poi link = log;

proc genmod; class premar birth;

model count = premar birth premar*v / dist = poi link = log;

variable вҖҳвҖҳassocвҖҷвҖҷ represents the cross-product of row and column scores, which has вҗӨ parameter as coefficient in model ЕҪ9.6.. Table A.6 uses GENMOD to fit the Poisson regression model with log link for the grouped data of Table 5.2. It models the total number of satellites at each width level ЕҪvariable вҖҳвҖҳsatellвҖҷвҖҷ., using the log of the number of cases as offset.
Correspondence analysis is available with PROC CORRESP.
Other Prof. Joseph Lang ЕҪ jblang@stat.uiowa.edu. has R and S-Plus functions for ML fitting of the generalized loglinear model ЕҪ8.18.. Becker ЕҪ1990. gave a FORTRAN program that fits the RCЕҪ M . model.

Chapter 10: Models for Matched Pairs
Table A.16 analyzes Table 10.1. For square tables, the AGREE option in PROC FREQ provides the McNemar chi-squared statistic for binary matched pairs, the X 2 test of fit of the symmetry model ЕҪalso called BowkerвҖҷs test.,

TABLE A.16 SAS Code for McNemarвҖҷs Test and Comparing Proportions for Matched Samples in Table 10.1

data matched; input first second count @@; datalines; 1 1 794 1 2 150 2 1 86 ; proc freq; weight count;
tables first*second / agree; proc catmod; weight count;
response marginals; model first*second = (1 0 ,
1 1;

2 2 570 exact mcnem;

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

645

TABLE A.17 SAS Code for Testing Marginal Homogeneity with Migration Data in Table 10.6

data migrate; input then $ now $ count m11 m12 m13 m21 m22 m23 m31 m32 m33 m44 m1 m2 m3;

datalines;

ne ne 11607 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

ne mw 100 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

ne s 366 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

ne w 124 -1 -1 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0

mw ne

87 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

mw mw 13677 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

mw s 515 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

mw w 302 0 0 0 -1 -1 -1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0

s ne 172 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

s mw 225 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0

s s 17819 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0

s w 270 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 -1 -1 0 0 0 1

w ne

63 -1 0 0 -1 0 0 -1 0 0 0 1 0 0

w mw 176 0 -1 0 0 -1 0 0 -1 0 0 0 1 0

w s 286 0 0 -1 0 0 -1 0 0 -1 0 0 0 1

w w 10192 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0

;

proc genmod;

model count = m11 m12 m13 m21 m22 m23 m31 m32 m33 m44 m1 m2 m3

/ dist = poi link = identity;

proc catmod; weight count; response marginals;

model then*now = бҺҗresponse бҺҗ /freq;

repeated time 2;

and CohenвҖҷs kappa and weighted kappa with SE values. The MCNEM keyword in the EXACT statement provides a small-sample binomial version of McNemarвҖҷs test. PROC CATMOD can provide the confidence interval for the difference of proportions. The code forms a model for the marginal proportions in the first row and the first column, specifying a model matrix in the model statement that has an intercept parameter ЕҪthe first column. that applies to both proportions and a slope parameter that applies only to the second; hence the second parameter is the difference between the second and first marginal proportions.
PROC LOGISTIC can conduct conditional logistic regression. Table A.17 shows ways of testing marginal homogeneity for Table 10.6. The GENMOD code shows the Lipsitz et al. ЕҪ1990. approach, expressing the I 2 expected frequencies in terms of parameters for the ЕҪ I y 1.2 cells in the first I y 1 rows and I y 1 columns, the cell in the last row and last column, and I y 1 marginal totals ЕҪwhich are the same for rows and columns.. Here, m11 denotes expected frequency вҗ®11, m1 denotes вҗ®1qs вҗ®q1, and so on. This parameterization uses formulas such as вҗ®14 s вҗ®1qy вҗ®11 y вҗ®12 y вҗ®13 for terms in the last column or last row. CATMOD provides the Bhapkar test ЕҪ10.16. of marginal homogeneity, as shown.

646

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.18 SAS Code Showing Square-Table Analysis of Table 10.5
data sex; input premar extramar symm qi count @@; unif = premar*extramar; datalines; 1 1 1 1 144 1 2 2 5 2 1 3 3 5 0 1 4 4 5 0 2 1 2 5 33 2 2 5 2 4 2 3 6 5 2 2 4 7 5 0 3 1 3 5 84 3 2 6 5 14 3 3 8 3 6 3 4 9 5 1 4 1 4 5 126 4 2 7 5 29 4 3 9 5 25 4 4 10 4 5 ; proc genmod; class symm;
model count = symm / dist = poi link = log; * symmetry; proc genmod; class extramar premar symm;
model count = symm extramar premar / dist = poi link = log; *QS; proc genmod; class symm;
model count = symm extramar premar / dist = poi link = log; * ordinal QS; proc genmod; class extramar premar qi;
model count = extramar premar qi / dist = poi link = log; * quasi indep; proc genmod; class extramar premar;
model count = extramar premar unif / dist = poi link = log; data sex2; input score below above @@; trials = below + above; datalines; 1 33 2 1 14 2 1 25 1 2 84 0 2 29 0 3 126 0 ; proc genmod data = sex2;
model above / trials = score / dist = bin link = logit noint; proc genmod data = sex2; model above / trials = /dist = bin link = logit noint; proc genmod data = sex2; model above / trials = /dist = bin link = logit;

Table A.18 shows various square-table analyses of Table 10.5. The вҖҳвҖҳsymmвҖҷвҖҷ
factor indexes the pairs of cells that have the same association terms in the
symmetry and quasi-symmetry models. For instance, вҖҳвҖҳsymmвҖҷвҖҷ takes the same value for cells ЕҪ1, 2. and ЕҪ2, 1.. Including this term as a factor in a model invokes a parameter вҗӯi j satisfying вҗӯi j s вҗӯji. The first model fits this factor alone, providing the symmetry model. The second model looks like the third except that it identifies вҖҳвҖҳpremarвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳextramarвҖҷвҖҷ as class variables ЕҪfor quasi-symmetry., whereas the third model statement does not ЕҪfor ordinal quasi-symmetry.. The fourth model fits quasi-independence. The вҖҳвҖҳqiвҖҷвҖҷ factor invokes the вҗҰi parameters. It takes a separate level for each cell on the main diagonal and a common value for all other cells. The fifth model fits the quasi-uniform association model ЕҪ10.29..
The bottom of Table A.18 fits square-table models as logit models. The pairs of cell counts ЕҪ ni j, nji., labeled as вҖҳвҖҳaboveвҖҷвҖҷ and вҖҳвҖҳbelowвҖҷвҖҷ with reference to the main diagonal, are six sets of binomial counts. The variable defined as вҖҳвҖҳscoreвҖҷвҖҷ is the distance ЕҪuj y ui. s j y i. The first two cases are symmetry

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

647

TABLE A.19 SAS Code for Fitting BradleyвҖ“Terry Model to Table 10.10
data baseball; input wins games milw detr toro newy bost clev balt; datalines; 7 13 1 -1 0 0 0 0 0 РёРёРё 6 13 0 0 0 0 0 1 -1 ; proc genmod;
model wins / games = milw detr toro newy bost clev balt / dist = bin link = logit noint covb;

and ordinal quasi-symmetry. Neither model contains an intercept ЕҪNOINT., and the ordinal model uses вҖҳвҖҳscoreвҖҷвҖҷ as the predictor. The third model allows an intercept and is the conditional symmetry model ЕҪ10.28..
Table A.19 uses GENMOD for logit fitting of the BradleyбҺҗTerry model to Table 10.10 by forming an artificial explanatory variable for each team. For a given observation, the variable for team i is 1 if it wins, y1 if it loses, and 0 if it is not one of the teams for that match. Each observation lists the number of wins ЕҪвҖҳвҖҳ winsвҖҷвҖҷ. for the team with variate-level equal to 1 out of the number of games ЕҪвҖҳвҖҳgamesвҖҷвҖҷ. against the team with variate-level equal to y1. The model has these artificial variates, one of which is redundant, as explanatory variables with no intercept term. The COVB option provides the estimated covariance matrix of parameter estimators.
Chapter 11: Analyzing Repeated Categorical Response Data
Table A.20 uses GENMOD for the likelihood-ratio test of marginal homogeneity for Table 11.1, where for instance m11p denotes вҗ®11q. The marginal homogeneity model expresses the eight cell expected frequencies in terms of

TABLE A.20 SAS Code for Testing Marginal Homogeneity with Crossover Study of Table 11.1
data crossover; input a b c count m111 m11p m1p1 mp11 m1pp m222 @@; datalines; 1 1 1 6 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 16 -1 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 2 -1 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 2 4 1 -1 -1 0 1 0 2 1 1 2 -1 0 0 1 0 0 2 1 2 4 1 -1 0 -1 1 0 2 2 1 6 1 0 -1 -1 1 0 2 2 2 6 0 0 0 0 0 1 ; proc genmod;
model count = m111 m11p m1p1 mp11 m1pp m222 / dist = poi link = identity; proc catmod; weight count; response marginals;
model a*b*c = бҺҗresponse бҺҗ /freq; repeated drug 3;

648

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.21 SAS Code for Marginal Modeling of Depression Data in Table 11.2

data depress; input case diagnose drug time outcome @@; * outcome = 1 is normal;

datalines;

10001 РёРёРё

10011

10021

340 1 1 0 0 340 1 1 1 0 340 1 1 2 0

;

proc genmod descending; class case;

model; outcome = diagnose drug time drug*time / dist = bin link = logit type3;

repeated subject = case / type = exch corrw;

proc n1mixed qpoints = 200;

parms alpha = -.03 beta1 = -1.3 beta2 = -.06 beta3 = .48 beta4 = 1.02 sigma = .066;

eta = alpha + beta1*diagnose + beta2*drug + beta3*time + beta4*drug*time + u;

p = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta)); model outcome ; binary(p); random u ; normal(0, sigma*sigma)

subject = case;

TABLE A.22 SAS Code for GEE and Random Intercept Cumulative Logit Analysis of Insomnia Data in Table 11.4

data francom;

input case treat time outcome @@;

datalines;

1101 РёРёРё

1111

239 0 0 4 239 0 1 4

;

proc genmod; class case;

model outcome = treat time treat*time / dist = multinomial

link = clogit;

repeated subject = case / type = indep corrw;

proc n1mixed qpoints = 40;

bounds i2>0; bounds i3>0;

eta1 = i1 + treat*beta1 + time*beta2 + treat*time*beta3+ u;

eta2 = i1 + i2 + treat*beta1 + time*beta2 + treat*time*beta3+ u;

eta3 = i1 + i2 + i3 + treat*beta1 + time*beta2 + treat*time*beta3+ u;

p1 = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta1));

p2 = exp(eta2) / (1 + exp(eta2))- exp(eta1) / (1 + exp(eta1));

p3 = exp(eta3) / (1 + exp(eta3))- exp(eta2) / (1 + exp(eta2));

p4 = 1- exp(eta3) / (1 + exp(eta3));

11 = y1*log(p1) + y2*log(p2) + y3*log(p3) + y4*log(p4); model y1 ; general(11);

estimate вҖҷinterc2 вҖҷ i1 + i2; * this is alphaбҺҗ2 in model, and

i1 is alphaбҺҗ1;

estimate вҖҷinterc3 вҖҷ i1 + i2 + i3; * this is alphaбҺҗ3 in model; random u ; normal(0, sigma*sigma) subject = case;

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

649

вҗ®111 , вҗ®11q, вҗ®1q1 , вҗ®q11 , вҗ®1qq, and вҗ®222 ЕҪsince вҗ®q1qs вҗ®qq1 s вҗ®1qq.. Note, for instance, that вҗ®112 s вҗ®11qy вҗ®111 and вҗ®122 s вҗ®111 q вҗ®1qqy вҗ®11qy вҗ®1q1 . CATMOD provides the generalized Bhapkar test ЕҪ11.5. of marginal homogeneity.
Table A.21 uses GENMOD to analyze Table 11.2 using GEE. Possible working correlation structures are TYPE s EXCH for exchangeable, TYPE s AR for autoregressive, TYPE s INDEP for independence, and TYPE s UNSTR for unstructured. Output shows estimates and standard errors under the naive working correlation and based on the sandwich matrix incorporating the empirical dependence. Alternatively, the working association structure in the binary case can use the log odds ratio ЕҪe.g., using LOGOR s EXCH for exchangeability.. The type 3 option in GEE provides score tests about effects. See Stokes et al. ЕҪ2000, Sec. 15.11. for the use of GEE with missing data.
Table A.22 uses GENMOD to implement GEE for a cumulative logit model for Table 11.4. For multinomial responses, independence is currently the only working correlation structure.

Other Joseph Lang ЕҪ jblang@stat.uiowa.edu. has R and S-Plus functions for ML fitting of marginal models through the generalized loglinear model ЕҪ11.8., using the constraint approach with Lagrange multipliers. The program MAREG ЕҪKastner et al. 1997. provides GEE fitting and ML fitting of marginal models with the Fitzmaurice and Laird ЕҪ1993. approach, allowing multicategory responses. See www. stat.uni-muenchen.der;andreasrmaregr winmareg. html.

Chapter 12: Random Effects: Generalized Linear Mixed Models
PROC NLMIXED extends GLMs to GLMMs by including random effects. Table A.23 analyzes the matched pairs model ЕҪ12.3.. Table A.24 analyzes the election data in Table 12.2.

TABLE A.23 SAS Code for Fitting Model (12.3) for Matched Pairs to Table 12.1
data matched; input case occasion response count @@; datalines; 2 0 1 794 1 1 1 794 2 0 1 150 2 1 0 150 3 0 0 86 3 1 1 86 4 0 0 570 4 1 0 570 ; proc n1mixed;
eta = alpha + beta*occasion + u; p = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta)); model response ; binary(p); random u ; normal(0, sigma*sigma) subject = case; replicate count;

650

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.24 SAS Code for GLMM Analysis of Election Data in Table 12.2
data vote; input y n; case = бҺҗnбҺҗ; datalines;
15 16 32 РёРёРё
14 ; proc n1mixed;
eta = alpha + u; p = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta)); model y ; binomial(n,p); random u ; normal (0, sigma*sigma) subject = case; predict p out = new; proc print data = new;

TABLE A.25 SAS Code for GLMM Modeling of Opinions in Table 10.13
data new; input sex poor single any count; datalines; 1 1 1 1 342 РёРёРё 2 0 0 0 457 ; data new; set new;
sex = sex- 1; case = бҺҗnбҺҗ; q1 = 1; q2 = 0; resp = poor; output; q1 = 0, q2 = 1; resp = single; output; q1 = 0; q2 = 0; resp = any; output; drop poor single any; proc n1mixed qpoints = 50; parms alpha = 0 beta1 = .8 beta2 = .3 gamma = 0 sigma = 8.6; eta = alpha + beta1*q1 + beta2*q2 + gamma*sex + u; p = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta)); model resp ; binary(p); random u ; normal(0, sigma*sigma) subject = case; replicate count;

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

651

TABLE A.26 SAS Code for GLMM for Leading Crowd Data in Table 12.8
data crowd; input mem1 att1 mem2 att2 count; datalines;
1 1 1 1 458 РёРёРё
0 0 0 0 554 ; data new; set crowd;
case = бҺҗnбҺҗ; x1m = 1; x1a = 0; x2m = 0; x2a = 0; var = 1; resp = mem1; output; x1m = 0; x1a = 1; x2m = 0; x2a = 0; var = 0; resp = att1; output; x1m = 0; x1a = 0; x2m = 1; x2a = 0; var = 1; resp = mem2; output; x1m = 0; x1a = 0; x2m = 0; x2a = 1; var = 0; resp = att2; output; drop mem1 att1 mem2 att2; proc n1mixed data = new; eta = beta1m*x1m + beta1a*x1a + beta2m*x2m + beta2a*x2a + um*var +
ua*(1- var); p = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta)); model resp ; binary(p); random um ua ; normal([0,0],[s1*s1, cov12, s2*s2]) subject = case; replicate count; estimate вҖҷmem changeвҖҷ beta2m- beta1m; estimate вҖҷatt changeвҖҷ
beta2a- beta1a;

Table A.25 fits model ЕҪ12.10. to Table 10.13. This shows how to set initial values and set the number of quadrature points for GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature ЕҪe.g., QPOINTS s.. One could let SAS fit without initial values but then take that fit as initial values in further runs, increasing QPOINTS until estimates and standard errors converge to the necessary precision.
Table A.21 uses NLMIXED for Table 11.2. Table A.22 uses NLMIXED for ordinal modeling of Table 11.4, defining a general multinomial log likelihood. Table A.26 shows a correlated bivariate random effect analysis of Table 12.8. Agresti et al. ЕҪ2000. showed NLMIXED examples for clustered data, Agresti and Hartzel ЕҪ2000. showed code for multicenter trials such as Table 12.5, and Hartzel et al. ЕҪ2001a. showed code for multicenter trials with an ordinal response. The Web site for the journal Statistical Modelling shows NLMIXED code for an adjacent-categories logit model and a nominal model at the data archive for Hartzel et al. ЕҪ2001b.. Chen and Kuo ЕҪ2001. discussed fitting multinomial logit models, including discrete-choice models, with random effects.
Other MLn ЕҪInstitute of Education, London. and HLM ЕҪScientific Software, Chicago. fit multilevel models. MIXOR is a FORTRAN program for ML

652

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO ANALYZE CATEGORICAL DATA

TABLE A.27 SAS Code for Overdispersion Analysis of Table 4.5

data moore;

input litter group n y @@;

z2 = 0; z3 = 0; z4 = 0;

if group = 2 then z2 = 1; if group = 3 then z3 = 1; if group = 4

then z4 = 1;

datalines;

1 1 10 1 РёРёРё

2 1 11 4

3 1 12 9

4144

55 4 14 1 56 4 8 0 57 4 6 0 58 4 17 0

;

proc logistic;

model y / n = z2 z3 z4 / scale = williams;

proc logistic;

model y / n = z2 z3 z4 / scale = pearson;

proc n1mixed qpoints = 200;

eta = alpha + beta2*z2 + beta3*z3 + beta4*z4 + u;

p = exp(eta) / (1 + exp(eta)); model y ; binomial(n,p); random u ; normal(0, sigma*sigma) subject = litter;

TABLE A.28 SAS Code for Fitting Models to Murder Data in Table 13.6
data new; input white black other response; datalines; 1070 119 55 0
60 16 5 1 РёРёРё
1 006 ; data new; set new; count = white; race = 0; output;
count = black; race = 1; output; drop white black other; data new2; set new; do i = 1 to count; output; end; drop i; proc genmod data = new2;
model response = race / dist = negbin link = log; proc genmod data = new2;
model response = race / dist = poi link = log scale = pearson; data new; set new; case = бҺҗnбҺҗ; proc n1mixed data = new qpoints = 400;
parms alpha = -3.7 beta = 1.90 sigma = 1.6; eta = alpha + beta*race + u; mu = exp(eta); model response ; poisson(mu); random u ; normal(0, sigma*sigma) subject = case; replicate count;

EXAMPLES OF SAS CODE BY CHAPTER

653

fitting of binary and ordinal random effects models available from Don Hedeker ЕҪwww.uic.edur;hedekerrmix.html..

Chapter 13: Other Mixture Models for Categorical Data
PROC LOGISTIC provides two overdispersion approaches for binary data. The SCALE s WILLIAMS option uses variance function of the beta-binomial form ЕҪ13.10., and SCALE s PEARSON uses the scaled binomial variance ЕҪ13.11.. Table A.27 illustrates for Table 4.5. That table also uses NLMIXED for adding litter random intercepts.
For Table 13.6, Table A.28 uses GENMOD to fit a negative binomial model and a quasi-likelihood model with scaled Poisson variance using the Pearson statistic, and NLMIXED to fit a Poisson GLMM. PROC NLMIXED can also fit negative binomial models.
Other Latent GOLD ЕҪdeveloped by J. Vermunt and J. Magidson for Statistical Innovations, Belmont, Massachusetts. can fit a wide variety of mixture models, including latent class models, nonparametric mixtures of logistic regression, and some Rasch mixture models.

APPENDIX B

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7

Chi-Squared Distribution Values

Right-Tailed Probability

df

0.250

0.100

0.050

0.025

0.010

1

1.32

2.71

3.84

5.02

6.63

2

2.77

4.61

5.99

7.38

9.21

3

4.11

6.25

7.81

9.35

11.34

4

5.39

7.78

9.49

11.14

13.28

5

6.63

9.24

11.07

12.83

15.09

6

7.84

10.64

12.59

14.45

16.81

7

9.04

12.02

14.07

16.01

18.48

8

10.22

13.36

15.51

17.53

20.09

9

11.39

14.68

16.92

19.02

21.67

10

12.55

15.99

18.31

20.48

23.21

11

13.70

17.28

19.68

21.92

24.72

12

14.85

18.55

21.03

23.34

26.22

13

15.98

19.81

22.36

24.74

27.69

14

17.12

21.06

23.68

26.12

29.14

15

18.25

22.31

25.00

27.49

30.58

16

19.37

23.54

26.30

28.85

32.00

17

20.49

24.77

27.59

30.19

33.41

18

21.60

25.99

28.87

31.53

34.81

19

22.72

27.20

30.14

32.85

36.19

20

23.83

28.41

31.41

34.17

37.57

25

29.34

34.38

37.65

40.65

44.31

30

34.80

40.26

43.77

46.98

50.89

40

45.62

51.80

55.76

59.34

63.69

50

56.33

63.17

67.50

71.42

76.15

60

66.98

74.40

79.08

83.30

88.38

70

77.58

85.53

90.53

95.02 100.4

80

88.13

96.58 101.8

106.6

112.3

90

98.65 107.6

113.1

118.1

124.1

100 109.1

118.5

124.3

129.6

135.8

Source: Calculated using StaTable, Cytel Software, Cambridge, MA.

0.005
7.88 10.60 12.84 14.86 16.75 18.55 20.28 21.96 23.59 25.19 26.76 28.30 29.82 31.32 32.80 34.27 35.72 37.16 38.58 40.00 46.93 53.67 66.77 79.49 91.95 104.2 116.3 128.3 140.2

654

0.001
10.83 13.82 16.27 18.47 20.52 22.46 24.32 26.12 27.88 29.59 31.26 32.91 34.53 36.12 37.70 39.25 40.79 42.31 43.82 45.32 52.62 59.70 73.40 86.66 99.61 112.3 124.8 137.2 149.5

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7
References
Adelbasit, K. M., and R. L. Plackett. 1983. Experimental design for binary data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 78: 90бҺҗ98.
Agresti, A. 1984. Analysis of Ordinal Categorical Data. New York: Wiley. Agresti, A. 1992. A survey of exact inference for contingency tables. Statist. Sci. 7: 131бҺҗ153. Agresti, A. 1993. Computing conditional maximum likelihood estimates for generalized Rasch
models using simple loglinear models with diagonal parameters. Scand. J. Statist. 20: 63бҺҗ71. Agresti, A. 1997. A model for repeated measurements of a multivariate binary response. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 92: 315бҺҗ321. Agresti, A. 1999. On logit confidence intervals for the odds ratio with small samples. Biometrics 55: 597бҺҗ602. Agresti, A. 2001. Exact inference for categorical data: Recent advances and continuing controversies. Statist. Medic. 20: 2709бҺҗ2722. Agresti, A., and B. Caffo. 2000. Simple and effective confidence intervals for proportions and difference of proportions result from adding two successes and two failures. Amer. Statist. 54: 280бҺҗ288. Agresti, A., and B. A. Coull. 1998. Approximate is better than exact for interval estimation of binomial parameters. Amer. Statist. 52: 119бҺҗ126. Agresti, A., and J. Hartzel. 2000. Strategies for comparing treatments on a binary response with multi-centre data. Statist. Medic. 19ЕҪ8.: 1115бҺҗ1139. Agresti, A., and J. Lang. 1993a. A proportional odds model with subject-specific effects for repeated ordered categorical responses. Biometrika 80: 527бҺҗ534. Agresti, A., and J. Lang. 1993b. Quasi-symmetric latent class models, with application to rater agreement. Biometrics 49: 131бҺҗ139. Agresti, A., and I. Liu. 1999. Modeling a categorical variable allowing arbitrarily many category choices. Biometrics 55: 936бҺҗ943. Agresti, A., and Y. Min. 2001. On small-sample confidence intervals for parameters in discrete distributions. Biometrics 57: 963бҺҗ971. Agresti, A., and R. Natarajan. 2001. Modeling clustered ordered categorical data: A survey. Internal. Statist. ReВ®. 69: 345бҺҗ371. Agresti, A., D. Wackerly, and J. Boyett. 1979. Exact conditional tests for cross-classifications: Approximation of attained significance levels. Psychometrika 44: 75бҺҗ84. Agresti, A., C. Chuang, and A. Kezouh. 1987. Order-restricted score parameters in association models for contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 619бҺҗ623.
655

656

REFERENCES

Agresti, A., C. R. Mehta, and N. R. Patel. 1990. Exact inference for contingency tables with ordered categories. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 85: 453бҺҗ458.
Agresti, A., J. Booth, J. Hobert, and B. Caffo. 2000. Random-effects modeling of categorical response data. Sociol. Methodol. 30: 27бҺҗ81.
Aitchison, J., and C. G. G. Aitken. 1976. Multivariate binary discrimination by the kernel method. Biometrika 63: 413бҺҗ420.
Aitchison, J., and C. H. Cho. 1989. The multivariate Poisson-log normal distribution. Biometrika 76: 643бҺҗ653.
Aitchison, J., and S. M. Shen. 1980. Logistic-normal distributions: Some properties and uses. Biometrika 67: 261бҺҗ272.
Aitchison, J., and S. D. Silvey. 1957. The generalization of probit analysis to the case of multiple responses. Biometrika 44: 131бҺҗ140.
Aitchison, J., and S. D. Silvey. 1958. Maximum likelihood estimation of parameters subject to restraints. Ann. Math. Statist. 29: 813бҺҗ828.
Aitkin, M. 1979. A simultaneous test procedure for contingency table models. Appl. Statist. 28: 233бҺҗ242.
Aitkin, M. 1980. A note on the selection of log-linear models. Biometrics 36: 173бҺҗ178.
Aitkin, M. 1999. A general maximum likelihood analysis of variance components in generalized linear models. Biometrics 55: 117бҺҗ128.
Aitkin, M., and D. Clayton. 1980. The fitting of exponential, Weibull, and extreme value distributions to complex censored survival data using GLIM. Appl. Statist. 29: 156бҺҗ163.
Aitkin, M., and M. Stasinopoulos. 1989. Likelihood analysis of a binomial sample size problem. Pp. 399бҺҗ411 in Contributions to Probability and Statistics: Essays in Honor of Ingram Olkin, ed. L. J. Gleser, M. D. Perlman, S. J. Press, and A. R. Sampson. New York: SpringerVerlag.
Aitkin, M., D. Anderson, and J. Hinde. 1981. Statistical modelling of data on teaching styles. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 144: 419бҺҗ461.
Aitkin, M., D. Anderson, B. Francis, and J. Hinde. 1989. Statistical Modeling in GLIM. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Albert, J. H. 1997. Bayesian testing and estimation of association in a two-way contingency table. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 92: 685бҺҗ693.
Albert, A., and J. A. Anderson. 1984. On the existence of maximum likelihood estimates in logistic models. Biometrika 71: 1бҺҗ10.
Albert, J. H., and S. Chib. 1993. Bayesian analysis of binary and polychotomous response data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88: 669бҺҗ679.
Albert, J. H., and A. K. Gupta. 1982. Mixtures of Dirichlet distributions and estimation in contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 10: 1261бҺҗ1268.
Allison, P. D. 1999. Logistic Regression Using the SAS System. Cary, NC: SAS Institute. Altham, P. M. E. 1969. Exact Bayesian analysis of a 2 = 2 contingency table and FisherвҖҷs вҖҳвҖҳexactвҖҷвҖҷ
significance test. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 31: 261бҺҗ269. Altham, P. M. E. 1970. The measurement of association of rows and columns for an r = s
contingency table. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 32: 63бҺҗ73. Altham, P. M. E. 1971. The analysis of matched proportions. Biometrika 58: 561бҺҗ576. Altham, P. M. E. 1975. Quasi-independent triangular contingency tables. Biometrics 31: 233бҺҗ238.
Altham, P. M. E. 1978. Two generalizations of the binomial distribution. Appl. Statist. 27: 162бҺҗ167.
Altham, P. M. E. 1984. Improving the precision of estimation by fitting a model. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 46: 118бҺҗ119.
Amemiya, T. 1981. Qualitative response models: A survey. J. Econom. Literature 19: 1483бҺҗ1536.

REFERENCES

657

Andersen, E. B. 1970. Asymptotic properties of conditional maximum-likelihood estimators. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 32: 283бҺҗ301.
Andersen, E. B. 1980. Discrete Statistical Models with Social Science Applications. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Andersen, E. B. 1995. Polytomous Rasch models and their estimation. Pp. 272бҺҗ291 in Rasch Models: Foundations, Recent DeВ®elopments, and Applications, eds. G. Fischer and I. Molenaar. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Anderson, J. A. 1972. Separate sample logistic discrimination. Biometrika 59: 19бҺҗ35. Anderson, J. A. 1975. Quadratic logistic discrimination. Biometrika 62: 149бҺҗ154.
Anderson, J. A. 1984. Regression and ordered categorical variables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 46: 1бҺҗ30.
Anderson, D. A., and M. Aitkin. 1985. Variance component models with binary response: Interviewer variability. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 47: 203бҺҗ210.
Anderson, C. J., and U. BВЁockenholt. 2000. Graphical regression models for polytomous vari-
ables. Psychometrika 65: 497бҺҗ509.
Anderson, T. W., and L. A. Goodman. 1957. Statistical inference about Markov chains. Ann. Math. Statist. 28: 89бҺҗ110.
Anderson, J. A., and P. R. Philips. 1981. Regression, discrimination, and measurement models for ordered categorical variables. Appl. Statist. 30: 22бҺҗ31.
Anderson, C. J., and J. K. Vermunt. 2000. Log-multiplicative models as latent variable models for nominal andror ordinal data. Sociol. Methodol. 30: 81бҺҗ121.
Aranda-Ordaz, F. J. 1981. On two families of transformations to additivity for binary response data. Biometrics 68: 357бҺҗ363.
Aranda-Ordaz, F. J. 1983. An extension of the proportional hazards model for grouped data. Biometrics 39: 109бҺҗ117.
Arminger, G., C. C. Clogg, and T. Cheng. 2000. Regression analysis of multivariate binary response variables using Rasch-type models and finite mixture methods. Sociol. Methodol. 30: 1бҺҗ26.
Armitage, P. 1955. Tests for linear trends in proportions and frequencies. Biometrics 11: 375бҺҗ386.
Ashford, J. R., and R. D. Sowden. 1970. Multivariate probit analysis. Biometrics 26: 535бҺҗ546.
Asmussen, S., and D. Edwards. 1983. Collapsibility and response variables in contingency tables. Biometrika 70: 567бҺҗ578.
Azzalini, A. 1994. Logistic regression for autocorrelated data with application to repeated measures. Biometrika 81: 767бҺҗ775.
Baglivo, J., D. Olivier, and M. Pagano. 1992. Methods for exact goodness-of-fit tests. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 87: 464бҺҗ469.
Baker, S. G. 1992. A simple method for computing the observed information matrix when using the EM algorithm with categorical data. J. Comput. Graph. Statist. 1: 63бҺҗ76.
Baker, S. G., and N. M. Laird. 1988. Regression analysis for categorical variables with outcome subject to nonignorable nonresponse. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 62бҺҗ69.
Baker, R. J., M. R. B. Clarke, and P. W. Lane. 1985. Zero entries in contingency tables. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 3: 33бҺҗ45.
Banerjee, C., M. Capozzoli, L. McSweeney, and D. Sinha. 1999. Beyond kappa: A review of interrater agreement measures. Canad. J. Statist. 27: 3бҺҗ23.
Baptista, J., and M. C. Pike. 1977. Algorithm AS115: Exact two-sided confidence limits for the odds ratio in a 2 = 2 table. Appl. Statist. 26: 214бҺҗ220.
Barnard, G. A. 1945. A new test for 2 = 2 tables. Nature 156: 177. Barnard, G. A. 1947. Significance tests for 2 = 2 tables. Biometrika 34: 123бҺҗ138.

658

REFERENCES

Barnard, G. A. 1949. Statistical inference. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 11: 115бҺҗ139.
Barnard, G. A. 1979. In contradiction to J. BerksonвҖҷs dispraise: Conditional tests can be more efficient. J. Statist. Plann. Inference 3: 181бҺҗ188.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E., and B. JВЁorgensen. 1991. Some parametric models on the simplex.
J. MultiВ®ariate Anal. 39: 106бҺҗ116.
Bartholomew, D. J. 1980. Factor analysis for categorical data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 42: 293бҺҗ321.
Bartholomew, D. J., and M. Knott. 1999. Latent Variable Models and Factor Analysis, 2nd ed. London: Edward Arnold.
Bartlett, M. S. 1935. Contingency table interactions. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Suppl. 2: 248бҺҗ252.
Bartlett, M. S. 1937. Some examples of statistical methods of research in agriculture and applied biology. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Suppl. 4: 137бҺҗ183.
Becker, M. 1989a. Models for the analysis of association in multivariate contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 1014бҺҗ1019.
Becker, M. 1989b. On the bivariate normal distribution and association models for ordinal categorical data. Statist. Probab. Lett. 8: 435бҺҗ440.
Becker, M. 1990. Maximum likelihood estimation of the RCЕҪM. association model. Appl. Statist. 39: 152бҺҗ167.
Becker, M., and A. Agresti. 1992. Log-linear modelling of pairwise interobserver agreement on a categorical scale. Statist. Medic. 11: 101бҺҗ114.
Becker, M., and C. C. Clogg. 1989. Analysis of sets of two-way contingency tables using association models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 142бҺҗ151.
Bedrick, E. J. 1983. Chi-squared tests for cross-classified tables of survey data. Biometrika 70: 591бҺҗ595.
Bedrick, E. J. 1987. A family of confidence intervals for the ratio of two binomial proportions. Biometrics 43: 993бҺҗ998.
Begg, C. B., and R. Gray. 1984. Calculation of polytomous logistic regression parameters using individualized regressions. Biometrika 71: 11бҺҗ18.
Beitler, P. J., and J. R. Landis. 1985. A mixed-effects model for categorical data. Biometrics 41: 991бҺҗ1000.
Benedetti, J. K., and M. B. Brown. 1978. Strategies for the selection of loglinear models. Biometrics 34: 680бҺҗ686.
Benichou, J. 1998. Attributable risk. Pp. 216бҺҗ229 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
BenzВҙecri, J.-P. 1973. LвҖҷAnalyse des DonnВҙees, Vol. 1, La Taxonomie; Vol. 2, LвҖҷAnalyse des
Correspondances. Paris: Dunod.
Berger, R., and D. D. Boos. 1994. p-Values maximized over a confidence set for the nuisance parameter. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 89: 1012бҺҗ1016.
Bergsma, W. P., and T. Rudas. 2002. Marginal models for categorical data. Ann. Statist. 30: 140бҺҗ159.
Berkson, J. 1938. Some difficulties of interpretation encountered in the application of the chi-square test. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 33: 526бҺҗ536.
Berkson, J. 1944. Application of the logistic function to bio-assay. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 39: 357бҺҗ365.
Berkson, J. 1951. Why I prefer logits to probits. Biometrics 7: 327бҺҗ339.
Berkson, J. 1953. A statistically precise and relatively simple method of estimating the bioassay with quantal response, based on the logistic function. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 48: 565бҺҗ599.
Berkson, J. 1955. Maximum likelihood and minimum logit вҗ№ 2 estimation of the logistic function. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 50: 130бҺҗ162.

REFERENCES

659

Berkson, J. 1978. In dispraise of the exact test. J. Statist. Plann. Inference 2: 27бҺҗ42. Berkson, J. 1980. Minimum chi-square, not maximum likelihood! Ann. Statist. 8: 457бҺҗ487.
Berry, G., and P. Armitage. 1995. Mid-P confidence intervals: A brief review. The Statistician 44: 417бҺҗ423.
Bhapkar, V. P. 1966. A note on the equivalence of two test criteria for hypotheses in categorical data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 61: 228бҺҗ235.
Bhapkar, V. P. 1968. On the analysis of contingency tables with a quantitative response. Biometrics 24: 329бҺҗ338.
Bhapkar, V. P. 1973. On the comparison of proportions in matched samples. Sankhya Ser A 35: 341бҺҗ356.
Bhapkar, V. P. 1989. Conditioning on ancillary statistics and loss of information in the presence of nuisance parameters. J. Statist. Plann. Inference. 21: 139бҺҗ160.
Bhapkar, V. P., and G. G. Koch. 1968. On the hypothesis of вҖҳвҖҳno interactionвҖҷвҖҷ in multidimensional contingency tables. Biometrics 24: 567бҺҗ594.
Bhapkar, V. P., and G. W. Somes. 1977. Distribution of Q when testing equality of matched proportions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 72: 658бҺҗ661.
Biggeri, A. 1998. Negative binomial distribution. Pp. 2962бҺҗ2967 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Billingsley, P. 1961. Statistical methods in Markov chains. Ann. Math. Statist. 32: 12бҺҗ40.
Birch, M. W. 1963. Maximum likelihood in three-way contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 25: 220бҺҗ233.
Birch, M. W. 1964a. A new proof of the PearsonбҺҗFisher theorem. Ann. Math. Statist. 35: 817бҺҗ824.
Birch, M. W. 1964b. The detection of partial association I: The 2 = 2 case. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 26: 313бҺҗ324.
Birch, M. W. 1965. The detection of partial association II: The general case. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 27: 111бҺҗ124.
Bishop, Y. M. M. 1971. Effects of collapsing multidimensional contingency tables. Biometrics 27: 545бҺҗ562.
Bishop, Y. M. M., and F. Mosteller. 1969. Smoothed contingency table analysis. Chap. IV-3 in The National Halothane Study. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Bishop, Y. M. M., S. E. Fienberg, and P. W. Holland. 1975. Discrete MultiВ®ariate Analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blaker, H. 2000. Confidence curves and improved exact confidence intervals for discrete distributions. Canad. J. Statist. 28: 783бҺҗ798.
Bliss, C. I. 1934. The method of probits. Science 79: 38бҺҗ39.
Bliss, C. I. 1935. The calculation of the dosageбҺҗmortality curve. Ann. Appl. Biol. 22: 134бҺҗ167.
Blyth, C. R. 1972. On SimpsonвҖҷs paradox and the sure-thing principle. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 67: 364бҺҗ366.
Blyth, C. R., and H. A. Still. 1983 Binomial confidence intervals. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 78: 108бҺҗ116.
Bock, R. D. 1970. Estimating multinomial response relations. Pp. 453бҺҗ479 in Contributions to Statistics and Probability, ed. R. C. Bose. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Bock, R. D., and M. Aitkin. 1981. Marginal maximum likelihood estimation of item parameters: Application of an EM algorithm. Psychometrika 46: 443бҺҗ459.
Bock, R. D., and L. V. Jones. 1968. The Measurement and Prediction of Judgement and Choice. San Francisco: Holden-Day.

660

REFERENCES

BВЁockenholt, U., and W. Dillon. 1997. Modelling within-subject dependencies in ordinal paired
comparison data. Psychometrika 62: 411бҺҗ434.
Bonney, G. E. 1987. Logistic regression for dependent binary observations. Biometrics 43: 951бҺҗ973.
Boos, D. D. 1992. On generalized score tests. Amer. Statist. 46: 327бҺҗ333.
Booth, J., and R. Butler. 1999. An importance sampling algorithm for exact conditional tests in log-linear models. Biometrika 86: 321бҺҗ332.
Booth, J. G., and J. P. Hobert. 1998. Standard errors of prediction in generalized linear mixed models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 93: 262бҺҗ272.
Booth, J. G., and J. P. Hobert. 1999. Maximizing generalized linear mixed model likelihoods with an automated Monte Carlo EM algorithm. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 61: 265бҺҗ285.
Bowker, A. H. 1948. A test for symmetry in contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 43: 572бҺҗ574.
Box, J. F. 1978. R. A. Fisher: The Life of a Scientist. New York: Wiley
Bradley, R. A. 1976. Science, statistics, and paired comparisons. Biometrics 32: 213бҺҗ240.
Bradley, R. A., and M. E. Terry. 1952. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs I. The method of paired comparisons. Biometrika 39: 324бҺҗ345.
Breslow, N. 1976. Regression analysis of the log odds ratio: A method for retrospective studies. Biometrics 32: 409бҺҗ416.
Breslow, N. 1981. Odds ratio estimators when the data are sparse. Biometrika 68: 73бҺҗ84.
Breslow, N. 1982. Covariance adjustment of relative-risk estimates in matched studies. Biometrics 38: 661бҺҗ672.
Breslow, N. 1984. Extra-Poisson variation in log-linear models. Appl. Statist. 33: 38бҺҗ44.
Breslow, N. 1996. Statistics in epidemiology: The caseбҺҗcontrol study. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 91: 14бҺҗ28.
Breslow, N., and D. G. Clayton. 1993. Approximate inference in generalized linear mixed models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88: 9бҺҗ25.
Breslow, N., and N. E. Day. 1980, 1987. Statistical Methods in Cancer Research, Vol. I, The Analysis of CaseбҺҗControl Studies; Vol. II. The Design and Analysis of Cohort Studies. Lyon: IARC.
Breslow, N., and X. Lin. 1995. Bias correction in generalised linear mixed models with a single component of dispersion. Biometrika 82: 81бҺҗ91.
Breslow, N., and W. Powers. 1978. Are there two logistic regressions for retrospective studies? Biometrics 34: 100бҺҗ105.
Breslow, N., N. Day, K. Halvorsen, R. Prentice, and C. Sabai. 1978. Estimation of multiple relative risk functions in matched caseбҺҗcontrol studies. Amer. J. Epidemiol. 108: 299бҺҗ307.
Brier, S. S. 1980. Analysis of contingency tables under cluster sampling. Biometrika 67: 591бҺҗ596.
Brooks, S. P., B. J. T. Morgan, M. S. Ridout, and S. E. Pack. 1997. Finite mixture models for proportions. Biometrics 53: 1097бҺҗ1115.
Bross, I. D. J. 1958. How to use ridit analysis. Biometrics 14: 18бҺҗ38.
Brown, M. B. 1976. Screening effects in multidimensional contingency tables. Appl. Statist. 25: 37бҺҗ46.
Brown, M. B., and J. K. Benedetti. 1977. Sampling behavior of tests for correlation in two-way contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 72: 309бҺҗ315.
Brown, P. J., and P. W. K. Rundell. 1985. Kernel estimates for categorical data. Technometrics 27: 293бҺҗ299.
Brown, L. D., T. T. Cai, and A. Das Gupta. 2001. Interval estimation for a binomial proportion. Statist. Sci. 16: 101бҺҗ133.

REFERENCES

661

Brownstone, D., and K. F. Train. 1999. Forecasting new product penetration with flexible substitution patterns. J. Econometrics 89: 109бҺҗ129.
Bull, S. B., and A. Donner. 1987. The efficiency of multinomial logistic regression compared with multiple group discriminant analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 1118бҺҗ1122.
Burnham, K. P., and D. R. Anderson. 1998. Model Selection and Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Burnham, K. P. and W. S. Overton. 1978. Estimation of the size of a closed population when capture probabilities vary among animals. Biometrika 65: 625бҺҗ633.
Burridge, J. 1981. A note on maximum likelihood estimation for regression models using grouped data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 43: 41бҺҗ45.
Cameron, A. C., and P. K. Trivedi. 1998. Regression Analysis of Count Data. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Carey, V., S. L. Zeger, and P. Diggle. 1993. Modelling multivariate binary data with alternating logistic regressions. Biometrika 80: 517бҺҗ526.
Carroll, R. J., S. Wang, and C. Y. Wang. 1995. Prospective analysis of logistic caseбҺҗcontrol pairs. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 90: 157бҺҗ169.
Casella, G., and R. Berger. 2001. Statistical Inference, 2nd ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth.
Catalano, P. J., and L. M. Ryan. 1992. Bivariate latent variable models for clustered discrete and continuous outcomes. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 87: 651бҺҗ658.
Caussinus, H. 1966. Contribution `a lвҖҷanalyse statistique des tableaux de corrВҙelation. Ann. Fac.
Sci. UniВ®. Toulouse 29: 77бҺҗ182.
Chaloner, K., and K. Larntz. 1989. Optimal Bayesian design applied to logistic regression experiments. J. Statist. Plann. Inference 21: 191бҺҗ208.
Chamberlain, G. 1980. Analysis of covariance with qualitative data. ReВ®. Econ. Stud. 47: 225бҺҗ238.
Chambers, E. A., and D. R. Cox. 1967. Discrimination between alternative binary response models. Biometrika 54: 573бҺҗ578.
Chambers, R. L., and D. G. Steel. 2001. Simple methods for ecological inference in 2 = 2 tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 164: 175бҺҗ192.
Chan, I. 1998. Exact tests of equivalence and efficacy with non-zero lower bound for comparative studies. Statist. Medic. 17: 1403бҺҗ1413.
Chan, J. S. K., and A. Y. C. Kuk. 1997. Maximum likelihood estimation for probit-linear mixed models with correlated random effects. Biometrics 53: 86бҺҗ97.
Chao, A., P. K. Tsay, S.-H. Lin, W.-Y. Shau, and D.-Y. Chao. 2001. The applications of captureбҺҗrecapture models to epidemiological data. Statist. Medic. 20: 3123бҺҗ3157.
Chapman, D. G., and R. C. Meng. 1966. The power of chi-square tests for contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 61: 965бҺҗ975.
Chen, Z. and L. Kuo. 2001. A note on the estimation of the multinomial logit model with random effects. Amer. Statist. 55: 89бҺҗ95.
Christensen, R. 1997. LogбҺҗLinear Models and Logistic Regression. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Chuang, C., D. Gheva, and C. Odoroff. 1985. Methods for diagnosing multiplicative-interaction models for two-way contingency tables. Commun. Statist. Ser. A 14: 2057бҺҗ2080.
Clogg, C. C. 1995. Latent class models. Pp. 311бҺҗ359 in Handbook of Statistical Modeling for the Social and BehaВ®ioral Sciences, ed. G. Arminger and C. C. Clogg. New York: Plenum Press.
Clogg, C. C., and S. R. Eliason. 1987. Some common problems in log-linear analysis. Sociol. Methods Res. 15: 4бҺҗ44.
Clogg, C. C., and L. A. Goodman. 1984. Latent structure analysis of a set of multidimensional contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 79: 762бҺҗ771.

662

REFERENCES

Clogg, C. C., and E. S. Shihadeh. 1994. Statistical Models for Ordinal Variables. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Clopper, C. J., and E. S. Pearson. 1934. The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case of the binomial. Biometrika 26: 404бҺҗ413.
Cochran, W. G. 1940. The analysis of variance when experimental errors follow the Poisson or binomial laws. Ann. Math. Statist. 11: 335бҺҗ347.
Cochran, W. G. 1943. Analysis of variance for percentages based on unequal numbers. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 38: 287бҺҗ301.
Cochran, W. G. 1950. The comparison of percentages in matched samples. Biometrika 37: 256бҺҗ266.
Cochran, W. G. 1952. The вҗ№ 2 test of goodness-of-fit. Ann. Math. Statist. 23: 315бҺҗ345. Cochran, W. G. 1954. Some methods of strengthening the common вҗ№ 2 tests. Biometrics 10:
417бҺҗ451.
Cochran, W. G. 1955. A test of a linear function of the deviations between observed and expected numbers. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 50: 377бҺҗ397.
Coe, P. R., and A. C. Tamhane. 1993. Small sample confidence intervals for the difference, ratio and odds ratio of two success probabilities. Commun. Statist. Ser. B 22: 925бҺҗ938.
Cohen, J. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 20: 37бҺҗ46.
Cohen, J. 1968. Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement with provision for scaled disagreement or partial credit. Psychol. Bull. 70: 213бҺҗ220.
Cohen, A., and H. B. Sackrowitz. 1991. Tests for independence in contingency tables with ordered alternatives. J. MultiВ®ariate Anal. 36: 56бҺҗ67.
Cohen, A., and H. B. Sackrowitz. 1992. An evaluation of some tests of trend in contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 87: 470бҺҗ475.
Collett, D. 1991. Modelling Binary Data. London: Chapman & Hall.
Conaway, M. R. 1989. Analysis of repeated categorical measurements with conditional likelihood methods. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 53бҺҗ62.
Cook, R. D., and S. Weisberg. 1999. Applied Regression Including Computing and Graphics. New York: Wiley.
Copas, J. B. 1973. Randomization models for the matched and unmatched 2 = 2 tables. Biometrika 60: 467бҺҗ476.
Copas, J. B. 1983. Plotting p against x. Appl. Statist. 32: 25бҺҗ31.
Copas, J. B. 1988. Binary regression models for contaminated data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 50: 225бҺҗ265.
Corcoran, C., L. Ryan, P. Senchaudhuri, C. Mehta, N. Patel, and G. Molenberghs. 2001. An exact trend test for correlated binary data. Biometrics 57: 941бҺҗ948.
Cormack, R. M. 1989. Log-linear models for captureбҺҗrecapture. Biometrics 45: 395бҺҗ413.
Cornfield, J. 1951. A method of estimating comparative rates from clinical data: Applications to cancer of the lung, breast and cervix. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 11: 1269бҺҗ1275.
Cornfield, J. 1956. A statistical problem arising from retrospective studies. In Proc. 3rd Berkeley Symposium on Mathematics, Statistics and Probability, ed. J. Neyman, 4: 135бҺҗ148.
Cornfield, J. 1962. Joint dependence of risk of coronary heart disease on serum cholesterol and systolic blood pressure: A discriminant function analysis. Fed. Proc. 21, Suppl. 11: 58бҺҗ61.
Coull, B. A., and A. Agresti. 1999. The use of mixed logit models to reflect heterogeneity in captureбҺҗrecapture studies. Biometrics 55: 294бҺҗ301.
Coull, B. A., and A. Agresti. 2000. Random effects modeling of multiple binomial responses using the multivariate binomial logit-normal distribution. Biometrics 56: 73бҺҗ80.

REFERENCES

663

Cox, C. 1984. An elementary introduction to maximum likelihood estimation for multinomial models: BirchвҖҷs theorem and the delta method. Amer. Statist. 38: 283бҺҗ287.
Cox, C. 1995. Location-scale cumulative odds models for ordinal data: A generalized non-linear model approach. Statist. Medic. 14: 1191бҺҗ1203.
Cox, C. 1996. Nonlinear quasi-likelihood models: Applications to continuous proportions. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 21: 449бҺҗ461.
Cox, D. R. 1958a. The regression analysis of binary sequences. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 20: 215бҺҗ242.
Cox, D. R. 1958b. Two further applications of a model for binary regression. Biometrika 45: 562бҺҗ565.
Cox, D. R. 1970. The Analysis of Binary Data ЕҪ2nd ed. 1989, by D. R. Cox and E. J. Snell.. London: Chapman & Hall.
Cox, D. R. 1972. The analysis of multivariate binary data. Appl. Statist. 21: 113бҺҗ120.
Cox, D. R. 1983. Some remarks on overdispersion. Biometrika 70: 269бҺҗ274.
Cox, D. R., and D. V. Hinkley. 1974. Theoretical Statistics. London: Chapman & Hall.
CramВҙer, H. 1946. Mathematical Methods of Statistics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cressie, N., and T. R. C. Read. 1984. Multinomial goodness-of-fit tests. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 46: 440бҺҗ464.
Cressie, N., and T. R. C. Read. 1989. Pearson X 2 and the loglikelihood ratio statistic G2: A comparative review. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 57: 19бҺҗ43.
Croon, M., W. Bergsma, and J. Hagenaars. 2000. Analyzing change in categorical variables by generalized log-linear models. Sociol. Methods Res. 29: 195бҺҗ229.
Crouchley, R. 1995. A random-effects model for ordered categorical data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 90: 489бҺҗ498.
Crowder, M. J. 1978. Beta-binomial ANOVA for proportions. Appl. Statist. 27: 34бҺҗ37.
DвҖҷAgostino, R. B., Jr. 1998. Propensity score methods for bias reduction in the comparison of a treatment to a non-randomized control group. Statist. Medic. 17: 2265бҺҗ2281.
Daniels, M. J., and C. Gatsonis. 1999. Hierarchical generalized linear models in the analysis of variations in health care utilization. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 94: 29бҺҗ42.
Dardanoni, V., and A. Forcina. 1998. A unified approach to likelihood inference on stochastic orderings in a nonparametric context. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 93: 1112бҺҗ1123.
Darroch, J. N. 1962. Interactions in multi-factor contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 24: 251бҺҗ263.
Darroch, J. N. 1981. The MantelбҺҗHaenszel test and tests of marginal symmetry; Fixed-effects and mixed models for a categorical response. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 49: 285бҺҗ307.
Darroch, J. N., and P. I. McCloud. 1986. Category distinguishability and observer agreement. Austral. J. Statist. 28: 371бҺҗ388.
Darroch, J. N., and D. Ratcliff. 1972. Generalized iterative scaling for log-linear models. Ann. Math. Statist. 43: 1470бҺҗ1480.
Darroch, J. N., S. L. Lauritzen, and T. P. Speed. 1980. Markov fields and log-linear interaction models for contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 8: 522бҺҗ539.
Darroch, J. N., S. E. Fienberg, G. F. V. Glonek, and B. W. Junker. 1993. A three-sample multiple-recapture approach to census population estimation with heterogeneous catchability. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88: 1137бҺҗ1148.
Das Gupta, S., and M. D. Perlman. 1974. Power of the noncentral F-test: Effect of additional variates on HotellingвҖҷs T 2-test. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 69: 174бҺҗ180.
David, H. A. 1988. The Method of Paired Comparisons, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davis, L. J. 1986a. Exact tests for 2 by 2 contingency tables. Amer. Statist. 40: 139бҺҗ141.

664

REFERENCES

Davis, L. J. 1986b. Relationship between strictly collapsible and perfect tables. Statist. Probab. Lett. 4: 119бҺҗ122.
Davis, L. J. 1989. Intersection union tests for strictly collapsibility in three-dimensional contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 17: 1693бҺҗ1708.
Davison, A. C., and D. V. Hinkley. 1997. Bootstrap Methods and Their Application. Cambridge, U.K. Cambridge University Press.
Dawson, R. B., Jr. 1954. A simplified expression for the variance of the вҗ№ 2-function on a contingency table. Biometrika 41: 280.
Day, N. E., and D. P. Byar. 1979. Testing hypotheses in caseбҺҗcontrol studies: Equivalence of MantelбҺҗHaenszel statistics and logit score tests. Biometrics 35: 623бҺҗ630.
de Falguerolles, A., S. Jmel, and J. Whittaker. 1995. Correspondence analysis and association models constrained by a conditional independence graph. Psychometrika 60: 161бҺҗ180.
Deming, W. E. 1964. Statistical Adjustment of Data ЕҪreprint of 1943 Wiley text.. New York: Dover.
Deming, W. E., and F. F. Stephan. 1940. On a least squares adjustment of a sampled frequency table when the expected marginal totals are known. Ann. Math. Statist. 11: 427бҺҗ444.
Dempster, A. P., N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 39: 1бҺҗ38.
Dey, D. K., S. K. Ghosh, and B. K. Mallick ЕҪeditors.. 2000. Generalized Linear Models: A Bayesian PerspectiВ®e. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Diaconis, P., and B. Efron. 1985. Testing for independence in a two-way table: New interpretations of the chi-square statistic. Ann. Statist. 13: 845бҺҗ874.
Diaconis, P., and B. Sturmfels. 1998. Algebraic algorithms for sampling from conditional distributions. Ann. Statist. 26: 363бҺҗ397.
Diggle, P. J., P. Heagerty, K.-Y. Liang, and S. L. Zeger. 2002. Analysis of Longitudinal Data, 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dittrich, R., R. Hatzinger, and W. Katzenbeisser. 1998. Modeling the effect of subject-specific covariates in paired comparison studies with an application to university rankings. Appl. Statist. 47: 511бҺҗ525.
Dobson, A. J. 2001. An Introduction to Generalized Linear Models, 2 nd ed. London: Chapman & Hall.
Dong, J. 1998. SimpsonвҖҷs paradox. Pp. 4108бҺҗ4110 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics, Vol. 5. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Dong, J., and J. S. Simonoff. 1994. The construction and properties of boundary kernels for smoothing sparse multinomials. J. Computat. Graph. Statist. 3: 57бҺҗ66.
Dong, J., and J. S. Simonoff. 1995. A geometric combination estimator for d-dimensional ordinal sparse contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 23: 1143бҺҗ1159.
Donner, A., and W. W. Hauck. 1986. The large-sample efficiency of the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimator in the fixed-strata case. Biometrics 42: 537бҺҗ545.
Doolittle, M. H. 1888. Association ratios. Bull. Philos. Soc. Washington 10: 83бҺҗ87, 94бҺҗ96.
Drost, F. C., W. C. M. Kallenberg, D. S. Moore, and J. Oosterhoff. 1989. Power approximations to multinomial tests of fit. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 130бҺҗ141.
Ducharme, G. R., and Y. Lepage. 1986. Testing collapsibility in contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 48: 197бҺҗ205.
Dupont, W. D. 1986. Sensitivity of FisherвҖҷs exact test to minor perturbations in 2 = 2 contingency tables. Statist. Medic. 5: 629бҺҗ635.
Dyke, G. V., and H. D. Patterson. 1952. Analysis of factorial arrangements when the data are proportions. Biometrics 8: 1бҺҗ12.

REFERENCES

665

Edwardes, M. D. deB. 1997. Univariate random cut-points theory for the analysis of ordered categorical data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 92: 1114бҺҗ1123.
Edwards, A. W. F. 1963. The measure of association in a 2 = 2 table. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser A 126: 109бҺҗ114.
Edwards, D. 2000. Introduction to Graphical Modelling, 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Edwards, D., and S. Kreiner. 1983. The analysis of contingency tables by graphical models. Biometrika 70: 553бҺҗ565.
Efron, B. 1975. The efficiency of logistic regression compared to normal discriminant analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 70: 892бҺҗ898.
Efron, B. 1978. Regression and ANOVA with zeroбҺҗone data: Measures of residual variation. J. Amer. Statist. Soc. 73: 113бҺҗ121.
Efron, B., and D. V. Hinkley. 1978. Assessing the accuracy of the maximum likelihood estimator: Observed versus expected Fisher information. Biometrika 65: 457бҺҗ482.
Efron, B., and C. Morris. 1975. Data analysis using SteinвҖҷs estimator and its generalizations. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 70: 311бҺҗ319.
Ekholm, A., J. W. McDonald, and P. W. F. Smith. 2000. Association models for a multivariate binary response. Biometrics 56: 712бҺҗ718.
Escoufier, Y. 1982. LвҖҷanalyse des tableaux de contingence simples et multiples. In Proc. International Meeting on the Analysis of Multidimensional Contingency Tables ЕҪRome, 1981., ed. R. Coppi. Metron 40: 53бҺҗ77.
Espeland, M. A., and S. L. Handelman. 1989. Using latent class models to characterize and assess relative error in discrete measurements. Biometrics 45: 587бҺҗ599.
Fahrmeir, L., and G. Tutz. 2001. MultiВ®ariate Statistical Modelling based on Generalized Linear Models, 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Farewell, V. T. 1979. Some results on the estimation of logistic models based on retrospective data. Biometrika 66: 27бҺҗ32.
Farewell, V. T. 1982. A note on regression analysis of ordinal data with variability of classification. Biometrika 69: 533бҺҗ538.
Fay, R. 1985. A jackknifed chi-squared test for complex samples. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 80: 148бҺҗ157.
Fay, R. 1986. Causal models for patterns of nonresponse. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 354бҺҗ365.
Ferguson, T. S. 1967. Mathematical Statistics: A Decision Theoretic Approach. New York: Academic Press.
Fienberg, S. E. 1970a. An iterative procedure for estimation in contingency tables. Ann. Math. Statist. 41: 907бҺҗ917.
Fienberg, S. E. 1970b. Quasi-independence and maximum likelihood estimation in incomplete contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Soc. 65: 1610бҺҗ1616.
Fienberg, S. E. 1972. The analysis of incomplete multi-way contingency tables. Biometrics 28: 177бҺҗ202.
Fienberg, S. E. 1980. FisherвҖҷs contributions to the analysis of categorical data. Pp. 75бҺҗ84 in R. A. Fisher: An Appreciation, ed. S. E. Fienberg and D. V. Hinkley. Berlin: SpringerVerlag.
Fienberg, S. E. 1984. The contributions of William Cochran to categorical data analysis. Pp. 103бҺҗ118 in W. G. CochranвҖҷs Impact on Statistics, ed. P. S. R. S. Rao and J. Sedransk. New York: Wiley.
Fienberg, S. E., and P. W. Holland. 1973. Simultaneous estimation of multinomial cell probabilities. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 68: 683бҺҗ690.
Fienberg, S. E., and K. Larntz. 1976. Loglinear representation for paired and multiple comparison models. Biometrika 63: 245бҺҗ254.

666

REFERENCES

Fienberg, S. E., M. A. Johnson, and B. J. Junker. 1999. Classical multilevel and Bayesian approaches to population size estimation using multiple lists. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 162: 383бҺҗ405.
Finney, D. J. 1947. The estimation from individual records of the relationship between dose and quantal response. Biometrika 34: 320бҺҗ334.
Finney, D. J. 1971. Probit Analysis, 3rd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Firth, D. 1987. On the efficiency of quasi-likelihood estimation. Biometrika 74: 233бҺҗ245.
Firth, D. 1989. Marginal homogeneity and the superposition of Latin squares. Biometrika 76: 179бҺҗ182.
Firth, D. 1991. Generalized linear models. Pp. 55бҺҗ82 in Statistical Theory and Modelling. In Honour of Sir DaВ®id Cox, FRS, D. V. Hinkley, N. Reid, and E. J. Snell, eds. London: Chapman & Hall.
Firth, D. 1993a. Bias reduction of maximum likelihood estimates. Biometrika 80: 27бҺҗ38.
Firth, D. 1993b. Recent developments in quasi-likelihood methods. Proc. ISI 49th Session, pp. 341бҺҗ358.
Firth, D., and J. Kuha. 2000. On the index of dissimilarity for lack of fit in log linear models. Unpublished manuscript.
Fischer, G. H., and I. W. Molenaar. 1995. Rasch Models: Foundations, Recent DeВ®elopments, and Applications. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Fisher, R. A. 1922. On the interpretation of chi-square from contingency tables, and the calculation of P. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 85: 87бҺҗ94.
Fisher, R. A. 1924. The conditions under which chi-square measures the discrepancy between observation and hypothesis. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 87: 442бҺҗ450.
Fisher, R. A. 1926. BayesвҖҷ theorem and the fourfold table. Eugenics ReВ®. 18: 32бҺҗ33. Fisher, R. A. 1934, 1970. Statistical Methods for Research Workers ЕҪoriginally published 1925,
14th ed., 1970.. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd. Fisher, R. A. 1935a. The Design of Experiments ЕҪ8th ed., 1966.. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd.
Fisher, R. A. 1935b. Appendix to article by C. Bliss. Ann. Appl. Biol. 22: 164бҺҗ165.
Fisher, R. A. 1935c. The logic of inductive inference. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 98: 39бҺҗ82. Fisher, R. A. 1945. A new test for 2 = 2 tables ЕҪLetter to the Editor.. Nature 156: 388.
Fisher, R. A. 1956. Statistical Methods for Scientific Inference. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd.
Fisher, R. A., and F. Yates. 1938. Statistical Tables. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Fitzmaurice, G. M., and N. M. Laird. 1993. A likelihood-based method for analysing longitudinal binary responses. Biometrika 80: 141бҺҗ151.
Fitzmaurice, G. M., N. M. Laird, and S. Lipsitz. 1994. Analysing incomplete longitudinal binary responses: A likelihood-based approach. Biometrics 50: 601бҺҗ612.
Fitzmaurice, G. M., N. M. Laird, and A. G. Rotnitzky. 1993. Regression models for discrete longitudinal responses. Statist. Sci. 8: 284бҺҗ299.
Fitzpatrick, S., and A. Scott. 1987. Quick simultaneous confidence intervals for multinomial proportions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 875бҺҗ878.
Fleiss, J. L. 1981. Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Fleiss, J. L., and J. Cohen. 1973. The equivalence of weighted kappa and the intraclass correlation coefficient as measures of reliability. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 33: 613бҺҗ619.
Fleiss, J. L., J. Cohen, and B. S. Everitt. 1969. Large-sample standard errors of kappa and weighted kappa. Psychol. Bull. 72: 323бҺҗ327.
Follman, D. A., and D. Lambert. 1989. Generalizing logistic regression by nonparametric mixing. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 295бҺҗ300.

REFERENCES

667

Forster, J. J., and P. W. F. Smith. 1998. Model-based inference for categorical survey data subject to non-ignorable non-response. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 60: 57бҺҗ70.
Forster, J. J., J. W. McDonald, and P. W. F. Smith. 1996. Monte Carlo exact conditional tests for log-linear and logistic models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 58: 445бҺҗ453.
Fowlkes, E. B. 1987. Some diagnostics for binary logistic regression via smoothing. Biometrika 74: 503бҺҗ515.
Fowlkes, E. B., A. E. Freeny, and J. Landwehr. 1988. Evaluating logistic models for large contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 611бҺҗ622.
Freedman, D., R. Pisani, and R. Purves. 1978. Statistics. New York: W. W. Norton.
Freeman, G. H., and J. H. Halton. 1951. Note on an exact treatment of contingency, goodnessof-fit and other problems of significance. Biometrika 38: 141бҺҗ149.
Freeman, D. H., Jr. and T. R. Holford. 1980. Summary rates. Biometrics 36: 195бҺҗ205.
Freeman, M. F., and J. W. Tukey. 1950. Transformations related to the angular and the square root. Ann. Math. Statist. 21: 607бҺҗ611.
Freidlin, B., and J. L. Gastwirth. 1999. Unconditional versions of several tests commonly used in the analysis of contingency tables. Biometrics 55: 264бҺҗ267.
Friendly, M. 2000. Visualizing Categorical Data. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
Frome, E. L. 1983. The analysis of rates using Poisson regression models. Biometrics 39: 665бҺҗ674.
Fuchs, C. 1982. Maximum likelihood estimation and model selection in contingency tables with missing data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 77: 270бҺҗ278.
Gabriel, K. R. 1966. Simultaneous test procedures for multiple comparisons on categorical data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 61: 1081бҺҗ1096.
Gabriel, K. R. 1971. The biplot graphic display of matrices with applications to principal component analysis. Biometrika 58: 453бҺҗ467.
Gail, M. H., and J. J. Gart. 1973. The determination of sample sizes for use with the exact conditional test in 2 = 2 comparative trials. Biometrics 29: 441бҺҗ448.
Gail, M., and N. Mantel. 1977. Counting the number of r = c contingency tables with fixed margins. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 72: 859бҺҗ862.
Gart, J. J. 1966. Alternative analyses of contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 28: 164бҺҗ179.
Gart, J. J. 1969. An exact test for comparing matched proportions in crossover designs. Biometrika 56: 75бҺҗ80.
Gart, J. J. 1970. Point and interval estimation of the common odds ratio in the combination of 2 = 2 tables with fixed margins. Biometrika 57: 471бҺҗ475.
Gart, J. J. 1971. The comparison of proportions: A review of significance tests, confidence intervals and adjustments for stratification. ReВ®. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 39: 148бҺҗ169.
Gart, J. J., and J. Nam. 1988. Approximate interval estimation of the ratio of binomial parameters: A review and corrections for skewness. Biometrics 44: 323бҺҗ338.
Gart, J. J., and J. R. Zweiful. 1967. On the bias of various estimators of the logit and its variance with applications to quantal bioassay. Biometrika 54: 181бҺҗ187.
Gelfand, A. E., and A. F. Smith. 1990. Sampling-based approaches to calculating marginal densities. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 85: 398бҺҗ409.
Genter, F. C., and V. T. Farewell. 1985. Goodness-of-link testing in ordinal regression models. Canad. J. Statist. 13: 37бҺҗ44.
Ghosh, B. K. 1979. A comparison of some approximate confidence intervals for the binomial parameter. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 74: 894бҺҗ900.
Ghosh, M., M. Chen, A. Ghosh, and A. Agresti. 2000. Hierarchical Bayesian analysis of binary matched pairs data. Statist. Sin. 10: 647бҺҗ657.

668

REFERENCES

Gibbons, R. D., and D. Hedeker. 1997. Random-effects probit and logistic regression models for three-level data. Biometrics 53: 1527бҺҗ1537.
Gill, J. 2000. Generalized Linear Models: A Unified Approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Gilmour, A. R., R. D. Anderson, and A. L. Rae. 1985. The analysis of binomial data by a generalized linear mixed model. Biometrika 72: 593бҺҗ599.
Gilula, Z., and S. Haberman. 1986. Canonical analysis of contingency tables by maximum likelihood. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 780бҺҗ788.
Gilula, Z., and S. Haberman. 1988. The analysis of multivariate contingency tables by restricted canonical and restricted association models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 760бҺҗ771.
Gilula, Z., and S. Haberman. 1998. Chi-square, partition of. Pp. 622бҺҗ627 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Gleser, L. J., and D. S. Moore. 1985. The effect of positive dependence on chi-squared tests for categorical data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 47: 459бҺҗ465.
Glonek, G. 1996. A class of regression models for multivariate categorical responses. Biometrika 83: 15бҺҗ28.
Glonek, G. F. V., and P. McCullagh. 1995. Multivariate logistic models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 57: 533бҺҗ546.
Glonek, G., J. N. Darroch, and T. P. Speed. 1988. On the existence of maximum likelihood estimators for hierarchical loglinear models. Scand. J. Statist. 15: 187бҺҗ193.
Gokhale, D. V., and S. Kullback. 1978. The Information in Contingency Tables. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Goldstein, H. 1995. MultileВ®el Statistical Models, 2nd ed. London: Edward Arnold.
Goldstein, H., and J. Rasbash. 1996. Improved approximations for multilevel models with binary responses. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser A 159: 505бҺҗ513.
Good, I. J. 1963. Maximum entropy for hypothesis formulation, especially for multi-dimensional contingency tables. Ann. Math. Statist. 34: 911бҺҗ934.
Good, I. J. 1965. The Estimation of Probabilities: An Essay on Modern Bayesian Methods. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Good, I. J. 1976. On the application of symmetric Dirichlet distributions and their mixtures to contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 4: 1159бҺҗ1189.
Good, I. J., and R. A. Gaskins. 1971. Nonparametric roughness penalties for probability densities. Biometrika 58: 255бҺҗ277.
Good, I. J., and Y. Mittal. 1987. The amalgamation and geometry of two-by-two contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 15: 694бҺҗ711.
Good, I. J., T. N. Gover, and G. J. Mitchell. 1970. Exact distributions for вҗ№ 2 and for the likelihood-ratio statistic for the equiprobable multinomial distribution. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 65: 267бҺҗ283.
Goodman, L. A. 1964a. Simultaneous confidence intervals for cross-product ratios in contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 26: 86бҺҗ102.
Goodman, L. A. 1964b. Interactions in multi-dimensional contingency tables. Ann. Math. Statist. 35: 632бҺҗ646.
Goodman, L. A. 1965. On simultaneous confidence intervals for multinomial proportions. Technometrics 7: 247бҺҗ254.
Goodman, L. A. 1968. The analysis of cross-classified data: Independence, quasi-independence, and interactions in contingency tables with or without missing entries. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 63: 1091бҺҗ1131.
Goodman, L. A. 1969a. On partitioning chi-square and detecting partial association in three-way contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 31: 486бҺҗ498.

REFERENCES

669

Goodman, L. A. 1969b. How to ransack social mobility tables and other kinds of cross-classification tables. Amer. J. Sociol. 75: 1бҺҗ40.
Goodman, L. A. 1970. The multivariate analysis of qualitative data: Interaction among multiple classifications. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 65: 226бҺҗ256.
Goodman, L. A. 1971a. The analysis of multidimensional contingency tables: Stepwise procedures and direct estimation methods for building models for multiple classifications. Technometrics 13: 33бҺҗ61.
Goodman, L. A. 1971b. The partitioning of chi-square, the analysis of marginal contingency tables, and the estimation of expected frequencies in multidimensional contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 66: 339бҺҗ344.
Goodman, L. A. 1973. The analysis of multidimensional contingency tables with some variables are posterior to others: A modified path analysis approach. Biometrika 60: 179бҺҗ192.
Goodman, L. A. 1974. Exploratory latent structure analysis using both identifiable and unidentifiable models. Biometrika 61: 215бҺҗ231.
Goodman, L. A. 1979a. Simple models for the analysis of association in cross-classifications having ordered categories. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 74: 537бҺҗ552.
Goodman, L. A. 1979b. Multiplicative models for square contingency tables with ordered categories. Biometrika 66: 413бҺҗ418.
Goodman, L. A. 1981a. Association models and canonical correlation in the analysis of cross-classifications having ordered categories. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 76: 320бҺҗ334.
Goodman, L. A. 1981b. Association models and the bivariate normal for contingency tables with ordered categories. Biometrika 68: 347бҺҗ355.
Goodman, L. A. 1983. The analysis of dependence in cross-classification having ordered categories, using log-linear models for frequencies and log-linear models for odds. Biometrics 39: 149бҺҗ160.
Goodman, L. A. 1985. The analysis of cross-classified data having ordered andror unordered categories: Association models, correlation models, and asymmetry models for contingency tables with or without missing entries. Ann. Statist. 13: 10бҺҗ69.
Goodman, L. A. 1986. Some useful extensions of the usual correspondence analysis approach and the usual log-linear models approach in the analysis of contingency tables. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 54: 243бҺҗ309.
Goodman, L. A. 1996. A single general method for the analysis of cross-classified data: Reconciliation and synthesis of some methods of Pearson, Yule, and Fisher, and also some methods of correspondence analysis and association analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 91: 408бҺҗ427.
Goodman, L. A. 2000. The analysis of cross-classified data: Notes on a century of progress in contingency table analysis, and some comments on its prehistory and its future.
Pp. 189бҺҗ231 in Statistics for the 21 st Century, ed. C. R. Rao and G. J. SzВҙekely. New York:
Marcel Dekker.
Goodman, L. A., and W. H. Kruskal. 1979. Measures of Association for Cross Classifications. New York: Springer-Verlag ЕҪcontains articles appearing in J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. in 1954, 1959, 1963, 1972..
Gould, S. J. 1981. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W. W. Norton.
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and A. Trognon. 1984. Pseudo maximum likelihood methods: Theory. Econometrica 52: 681бҺҗ700.
Graubard, B. I., and E. L. Korn. 1987. Choice of column scores for testing independence in ordered 2 = K contingency tables. Biometrics 43: 471бҺҗ476.
Green, P. J. 1984. Iteratively weighted least squares for maximum likelihood estimation and some robust and resistant alternatives. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 46: 149бҺҗ192.
Greenacre, M. J. 1993. Correspondence Analysis in Practice. New York: Academic Press.

670

REFERENCES

Greenland, S. 1991. On the logical justification of conditional tests for two-by-two contingency tables. Amer. Statist. 45: 248бҺҗ251.
Greenland, S., and J. M. Robins. 1985. Estimation of a common effect parameter from sparse follow-up data. Biometrics 41: 55бҺҗ68.
Greenwood, M., and G. U. Yule. 1920. An inquiry into the nature of frequency distributions representative of multiple happenings with particular reference to the occurrence of multiple attacks of disease or of repeated accidents. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser A 83: 255бҺҗ279.
Greenwood, P. E., and M. S. Nikulin. 1996. A Guide to Chi-Squared Testing. New York: Wiley.
Grizzle, J. E., C. F. Starmer, and G. G. Koch. 1969. Analysis of categorical data by linear models. Biometrics 25: 489бҺҗ504.
Gross, S. T. 1981. On asymptotic power and efficiency of tests of independence in contingency tables with ordered classifications. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 76: 935бҺҗ941.
Gueorguieva, R., and A. Agresti. 2001. A correlated probit model for joint modeling of clustered binary and continuous responses. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 96: 1102бҺҗ1112.
Haber, M. 1980. A comparison of some continuity corrections for the chi-squared test on 2 = 2 tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 75: 510бҺҗ515.
Haber, M. 1982. The continuity correction and statistical testing. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 50: 135бҺҗ144.
Haber, M. 1985. Maximum likelihood methods for linear and log-linear models in categorical data. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 3: 1бҺҗ10.
Haber, M. 1986. An exact unconditional test for the 2 = 2 comparative trial. Psychol. Bull. 99: 129бҺҗ132.
Haber, M. 1989. Do the marginal totals of a 2 = 2 contingency table contain information regarding the table proportions? Commun. Statist. Ser A 18: 147бҺҗ156.
Haberman, S. J. 1973a. The analysis of residuals in cross-classification tables. Biometrics 29: 205бҺҗ220.
Haberman, S. J. 1973b. Log-linear models for frequency data: Sufficient statistics and likelihood equations. Ann. Statist. 1: 617бҺҗ632.
Haberman, S. J. 1974a. The Analysis of Frequency Data. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Haberman, S. J. 1974b. Log-linear models for frequency tables with ordered classifications. Biometrics 36: 589бҺҗ600.
Haberman, S. J. 1977a. Log-linear models and frequency tables with small expected cell counts. Ann. Statist. 5: 1148бҺҗ1169.
Haberman, S. J. 1977b. Maximum likelihood estimation in exponential response models. Ann. Statist. 5: 815бҺҗ841.
Haberman, S. J. 1978, 1979. Analysis of QualitatiВ®e Data, Vols. 1 and 2. New York: Academic Press.
Haberman, S. J. 1981. Tests for independence in two-way contingency tables based on canonical correlation and on linear-by-linear interaction. Ann. Statist. 9: 1178бҺҗ1186.
Haberman, S. J. 1982. The analysis of dispersion of multinomial responses. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 77: 568бҺҗ580.
Haberman, S. J. 1988. A warning on the use of chi-squared statistics with frequency tables with small expected cell counts. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 555бҺҗ560.
Haberman, S. J. 1995. Computation of maximum likelihood estimates in association models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 90: 1438бҺҗ1446.
Hagenaars, J. A. 1998. Categorical causal modeling: Latent class analysis and directed log-linear models with latent variables. Sociol. Methods Res. 26: 436бҺҗ486.
Hald, A. 1998. A History of Mathematical Statistics from 1750 to 1930. New York: Wiley.

REFERENCES

671

Haldane, J. B. S. 1940. The mean and variance of вҗ№ 2, when used as a test of homogeneity, when expectations are small. Biometrika 31: 346бҺҗ355.
Haldane, J. B. S. 1956. The estimation and significance of the logarithm of a ratio of frequencies. Ann. Human Genet. 20: 309бҺҗ311.
Hall, P., and D. M. Titterington. 1987. On smoothing sparse multinomial data. Austral. J. Statist. 29: 19бҺҗ37.
Hamada, M., and C. F. J. Wu. 1990. A critical look at accumulation analysis and related methods. Technometrics 32: 119бҺҗ130.
Hansen, L. P. 1982. Large sample properties of generalized-method of moments estimators. Econometrica 50: 1029бҺҗ1054.
Harkness, W. L., and L. Katz. 1964. Comparison of the power functions for the test of independence in 2 = 2 contingency tables. Ann. Math. Statist. 35: 1115бҺҗ1127.
Harrell F. E., R. M. Califf, D. B. Pryor, K. L. Lee, and R. A. Rosati. 1982. Evaluating the yield of medical tests. J. Amer. Medic. Assoc. 247: 2543бҺҗ2546.
Hartzel, J., I.-M. Liu, and A. Agresti. 2001a. Describing heterogeneous effects in stratified ordinal contingency tables, with application to multi-center clinical trials. Computat. Statist. Data Anal. 35: 429бҺҗ449.
Hartzel, J., A. Agresti, and B. Caffo. 2001b. Multinomial logit random effects models. Statistical Modelling 1: 81бҺҗ102.
Haslett, S. 1990. Degrees of freedom and parameter estimability in hierarchical models for sparse complete contingency tables. Computat. Statist. Data Anal. 9: 179бҺҗ195.
Hastie, T., and R. Tibshirani. 1987. Non-parametric logistic and proportional odds regression. Appl. Statist. 36: 260бҺҗ276.
Hastie, T., and R. Tibshirani. 1990. Generalized AdditiВ®e Models. London: Chapman & Hall.
Hatzinger, R. 1989. The Rasch model, some extensions and their relation to the class of generalized linear models. Statistical Modelling: Lecture Notes in Statistics, Vol. 57. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Hauck, W. W. 1979. The large sample variance of the MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimator of a common odds ratio. Biometrics 35: 817бҺҗ819.
Hauck, W. W. 1983. A note on confidence bands for the logistic response curve. Amer. Statist. 37: 158бҺҗ160.
Hauck, W. W., and A. Donner. 1977. WaldвҖҷs test as applied to hypotheses in logit analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 72: 851бҺҗ853.
Heagerty, P. J. 1999. Marginally specified logistic-normal models for longitudinal binary data. Biometrics 55: 688бҺҗ698.
Heagerty, P. J., and S. L. Zeger. 1996. Marginal regression models for clustered ordinal measurements. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 91: 1024бҺҗ1036.
Heagerty, P. J., and S. L. Zeger. 2000. Marginalized multilevel models and likelihood inference. Statist. Sci. 15: 1бҺҗ19.
Hedeker, D., and R. D. Gibbons. 1994. A random-effects ordinal regression model for multilevel analysis. Biometrics 50: 933бҺҗ944.
Heinen, T. 1996. Latent Class and Discrete Latent Trait Models. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Heyde, C. C. 1997. Quasi-likelihood and Its Application. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hinde, J. 1982. Compound Poisson regression models. Pp. 109бҺҗ121 in GLIM 82: Proc. International Conference on Generalised Linear Models, ed. R. Gilchrist. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hinde, J., and C. G. B. DemВҙetrio. 1998. Overdispersion: Models and estimation. Comput. Statist.
Data Anal. 27: 151бҺҗ170.

672

REFERENCES

Hirji, K. F. 1991. A comparison of exact, mid-P, and score tests for matched case-control studies. Biometrics 47: 487бҺҗ496.
Hirji, K. F., C. R. Mehta, and N. R. Patel. 1987. Computing distributions for exact logistic regression. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 1110бҺҗ1117.
Hirotsu, C. 1982. Use of cumulative efficient scores for testing ordered alternatives in discrete models. Biometrika 69: 567бҺҗ577.
Hirschfeld, H. O. 1935. A connection between correlation and contingency. Cambridge Philos. Soc. Proc. ЕҪ Math. Proc.. 31: 520бҺҗ524.
Hodges, J. L., Jr. 1958. Fitting the logistic by maximum likelihood. Biometrics 14: 453бҺҗ461.
Hoem, J. M. 1987. Statistical analysis of a multiplicative model and its application to the standardization of vital rates: A review. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 5: 119бҺҗ152.
Holford, T. R. 1980. The analysis of rates and of survivorship using log-linear models. Biometrics 36: 299бҺҗ305.
Holt, D., A. J. Scott, and P. D. Ewings. 1980. Chi-squared tests with survey data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 143: 303бҺҗ320.
Hook, E. B., and R. R. Regal. 1995. CaptureбҺҗrecapture methods in epidemiology: Methods and limitations. Epidemiol. ReВ®. 17: 243бҺҗ264.
Hosmer, D. W., and S. Lemeshow. 1980. A goodness-of-fit test for multiple logistic regression model. Commun. Statist. Ser A 9: 1043бҺҗ1069.
Hosmer, D. W., and S. Lemeshow. 2000. Applied Logistic Regression, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Hosmer, D. W., T. Hosmer, S. le Cessie, and S. Lemeshow. 1997. A comparison of goodness-of-fit tests for the logistic regression model. Statist. Medic. 16: 965бҺҗ980.
Hout, M., O. D. Duncan, and M. E. Sobel. 1987. Association and heterogeneity: Structural models of similarities and differences. Sociol. Methodol. 17: 145бҺҗ184.
Howard, J. V. 1998. The 2 = 2 table: A discussion from a Bayesian viewpoint. Statist. Sci. 13: 351бҺҗ367.
Hsieh, F. Y. 1989. Sample size tables for logistic regression. Statist. Medic. 8: 795бҺҗ802.
Hsieh, F. Y., D. A. Bloch, and M. D. Larsen. 1998. A simple method of sample size calculation for linear and logistic regression. Statist. Medic. 17: 1623бҺҗ1634.
Hwang, J. T. G., and M. T. Wells. 2002. Optimality results for mid P-values. To appear. Hwang, J. T. G., and M.-C. Yang. 2001. An optimality theory for mid P-values in 2 = 2
contingency tables. Statist. Sin. 11: 807бҺҗ826. Imrey, P. B. 1998. BradleyбҺҗTerry model. Pp. 437бҺҗ443 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester,
UK: Wiley.
Imrey, P. B., W. D. Johnson, and G. G. Koch. 1976. An incomplete contingency table approach to paired-comparison experiments. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 71: 614бҺҗ623.
Imrey, P. B., G. G. Koch, and M. E. Stokes. 1981. Categorical data analysis: Some reflections on the log linear model and logistic regression. I: Historical and methodological overview. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 49: 265бҺҗ283.
Ireland, C. T., and S. Kullback. 1968a. Minimum discrimination information estimation. Biometrics 24: 707бҺҗ713.
Ireland, C. T., and S. Kullback. 1968b. Contingency tables with given marginals. Biometrika 55: 179бҺҗ188.
Ireland, C. T., H. H. Ku, and S. Kullback. 1969. Symmetry and marginal homogeneity of an r = r contingency table. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 64: 1323бҺҗ1341.
Irwin, J. O. 1935. Tests of significance for differences between percentages based on small numbers. Metron 12: 83бҺҗ94.
Jennison, C., and B. W. Turnbull. 2000. Group Sequential Methods with Applications to Clinical Trials. London: Chapman & Hall.

REFERENCES

673

Johnson, B. M. 1971. On the admissible estimators for certain fixed sample binomial problems. Ann. Math. Statist. 42: 1579бҺҗ1587.
Johnson, W. 1985. Influence measures for logistic regression: Another point of view. Biometrika 72: 59бҺҗ65.
Johnson, N. L., S. Kotz, and A. W. Kemp. 1992. UniВ®ariate Discrete Distributions, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Jones, B., and M. G. Kenward. 1987. Modelling binary data from a three-period cross-over trial. Statist. Medic. 6: 555бҺҗ564.
Jones, M. P., T. W. OвҖҷGorman, J. H. Lemke, and R. F. Woolson. 1989. A Monte Carlo investigation of homogeneity tests of the odds ratio under various sample size considerations. Biometrics 45: 171бҺҗ181.
JoЦҖ rgensen, B. 1983. Maximum likelihood estimation and large-sample inference for generalized
linear and nonlinear regression models. Biometrika 70: 19бҺҗ28.
JoЦҖ rgensen, B. 1987. Exponential dispersion models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 49: 127бҺҗ162.
Kalbfleisch, J. D., and J. F. Lawless. 1985. The analysis of panel data under a Markov assumption. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 80: 863бҺҗ871.
Kastner, C., A. Fieger, and C. Heumann. 1997. MAREG and WinMAREG: A tool for marginal regression models. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 24: 237бҺҗ241.
Kauermann, G., and R. J. Carroll, 2001. A note on the efficiency of sandwich covariance matrix estimation. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 96: 1387бҺҗ1397.
Kauermann, G., and G. Tutz. 2001. Testing generalized linear and semiparametric models against smooth alternatives. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 63: 147бҺҗ166.
Kelderman, H. 1984. Loglinear Rasch model tests. Psychometrika 49: 223бҺҗ245.
Kempthorne, O. 1979. In dispraise of the exact test: Reactions. J. Statist. Plann. Inference 3: 199бҺҗ213.
Kendall, M. G. 1945. The treatment of ties in rank problems. Biometrika 33: 239бҺҗ251.
Kendall, M., and A. Stuart. 1979. The AdВ®anced Theory of Statistics, Vol. 2; Inference and Relationship, 4th ed. New York: Macmillan.
Kenward, M. G., and B. Jones. 1991. The analysis of categorical data from cross-over trials using a latent variable model. Statist. Medic. 10: 1607бҺҗ1619.
Kenward, M. G., and B. Jones. 1994. The analysis of binary and categorical data from crossover trials. Statist. Methods Medic. Res. 3: 325бҺҗ344.
Kenward, M. G., E. Lesaffre, and G. Molenberghs. 1994. An application of maximum likelihood and estimating equations to the analysis of ordinal data from a longitudinal study with cases missing at random. Biometrics 50: 945бҺҗ953.
Khamis, H. J. 1983. Log-linear model analysis of the semi-symmetric intraclass contingency table. Commun. Statist. Ser. A 12: 2723бҺҗ2752.
Kim, D., and A. Agresti. 1995. Improved exact inference about conditional association in three-way contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 90: 632бҺҗ639.
Kim, D., and A. Agresti. 1997. Nearly exact tests of conditional independence and marginal homogeneity for sparse contingency tables. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 24: 89бҺҗ104.
King, G. 1997. A Solution to the Ecological Inference Problem. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Knuiman, M. W., and T. P. Speed. 1988. Incorporating prior information into the analysis of contingency tables. Biometrics 44: 1061бҺҗ1071.
Koch, G. G., and V. P. Bhapkar. 1982. Chi-square tests. Pp. 442бҺҗ457 in Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences, Vol. 1. New York: Wiley.

674

REFERENCES

Koch, G. G., J. R. Landis, J. L. Freeman, D. H. Freeman, and R. G. Lehnen. 1977. A general methodology for the analysis of experiments with repeated measurement of categorical data. Biometrics 33: 133бҺҗ158.
Koch, G. G., I. A. Amara, G. W. Davis, and D. B. Gillings. 1982. A review of some statistical methods for covariance analysis of categorical data. Biometrics 38: 563бҺҗ595.
Koch, G. G., P. B. Imrey, J. M. Singer, S. S. Atkinson, and M. E. Stokes. 1985. Lecture Notes for
Analysis of Categorical Data. Montreal: Les Presses de LвҖҷUniversitВҙe de MontrВҙeal.
Koehler, K. 1986. Goodness-of-fit tests for log-linear models in sparse contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 483бҺҗ493.
Koehler, K. 1998. Chi-square tests. Pp. 608бҺҗ622 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Koehler, K., and K. Larntz. 1980. An empirical investigation of goodness-of-fit statistics for sparse multinomials. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 75: 336бҺҗ344.
Koehler, K., and J. Wilson. 1986. Chi-square tests for comparing vectors of proportions for several cluster samples. Commun. Statist. Ser. A 15: 2977бҺҗ2990.
Koopman, P. A. R. 1984. Confidence limits for the ratio of two binomial proportions. Biometrics 40: 513бҺҗ517.
Kraemer, H. C. 1979. Ramifications of a population model for вҗ¬ as a coefficient of reliability. Psychometrika 44: 461бҺҗ472.
Kreiner, S. 1987. Analysis of multidimensional contingency tables by exact conditional tests: Techniques and strategies. Scand. J. Statist. 14: 97бҺҗ112.
Kreiner, S. 1998. Interaction models. Pp. 2063бҺҗ2068 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Kruskal, W. H. 1958. Ordinal measures of association. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 53: 814бҺҗ861.
Ku, H. H., R. N. Varner, and S. Kullback. 1971. Analysis of multidimensional contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 66: 55бҺҗ64.
Kuha, J., and C. Skinner. 1997. Categorical data analysis and misclassification. Pp. 633бҺҗ670 in SurВ®ey Measurement and Process Quality, ed. L. Lyberg et al. New York: Wiley.
Kuha, J., C. Skinner, and J. Palmgren. 1998. Misclassification error. Pp. 2615бҺҗ2621 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Kullback, S. 1959. Information Theory and Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Kullback, S., M. Kupperman, and H. H. Ku. 1962. Tests for contingency tables and Markov chains. Technometrics 4: 573бҺҗ608.
Kupper, L. L., and J. K. Haseman. 1978. The use of a correlated binomial model for the analysis of certain toxicological experiments. Biometrics 34: 69бҺҗ76.
Kupper, L. L., C. Portier, M. D. Hogan, and E. Yamamoto. 1986. The impact of litter effects on doseбҺҗresponse modeling in teratology. Biometrics 42: 85бҺҗ98.
LВЁaВЁarВЁa, E., and J. N. S. Matthews. 1985. The equivalence of two models for ordinal data.
Biometrika 72: 206бҺҗ207.
Lachin, J. M. 1977. Sample-size determinations for r = c comparative trials. Biometrics 33: 315бҺҗ324.
Laird, N. M. 1978. Empirical Bayes methods for two-way contingency tables. Biometrika 65: 581бҺҗ590.
Laird, N. M. 1998. EM algorithm. Pp. 1300бҺҗ1313 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Laird, N. M., and D. Olivier. 1981. Covariance analysis of censored survival data using log-linear analysis techniques. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 76: 231бҺҗ240.
Lancaster, H. O. 1949. The derivation and partition of вҗ№ 2 in certain discrete distributions. Biometrika 36: 117бҺҗ129.

REFERENCES

675

Lancaster, H. O. 1951. Complex contingency tables treated by partition of вҗ№ 2. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 13: 242бҺҗ249.
Lancaster, H. O. 1961. Significance tests in discrete distributions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 56: 223бҺҗ234.
Lancaster, H. O. 1969. The Chi-Squared Distribution. New York: Wiley.
Lancaster, H. O., and M. A. Hamdan. 1964. Estimation of the correlation coefficient in contingency tables with possible nonmetrical characters. Psychometrika 29: 383бҺҗ391.
Landis, J. R., and G. G. Koch. 1977. An application of hierarchical kappa-type statistics in the assessment of majority agreement among multiple observers. Biometrics 33: 363бҺҗ374.
Landis, J. R., E. R. Heyman, and G. G. Koch. 1978. Average partial association in three-way contingency tables: A review and discussion of alternative tests. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 46: 237бҺҗ254.
Landis, J. R., T. J. Sharp, S. J. Kuritz, and G. G. Koch. 1998. Mantel-Haenszel methods. Pp. 2378бҺҗ2691 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Landwehr, J. M., D. Pregibon, and A. C. Shoemaker. 1984. Graphical methods for assessing logistic regression models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 79: 61бҺҗ71.
Lang, J. B. 1992. Obtaining the observed information matrix for the Poisson log linear model with incomplete data. Biometrika 79: 405бҺҗ407.
Lang, J. B. 1996a. Maximum likelihood methods for a generalized class of log-linear models. Ann. Statist. 24: 726бҺҗ752.
Lang, J. B. 1996b. On the partitioning of goodness-of-fit statistics for multivariate categorical response models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 91: 1017бҺҗ1023.
Lang, J. B. 1996c. On the comparison of multinomial and Poisson log-linear models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 58: 253бҺҗ266.
Lang, J. B., and A. Agresti. 1994. Simultaneously modeling joint and marginal distributions of multivariate categorical responses. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 89: 625бҺҗ632.
Lang, J. B., J. W. McDonald, and P. W. F. Smith. 1999. Association-marginal modeling of multivariate categorical responses: A maximum likelihood approach. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 94: 1161бҺҗ1171.
Laplace, P. S. 1812. ThВҙeorie Analytique des ProbabilitВҙes. Paris: Courcier.
Larntz, K. 1978. Small-sample comparison of exact levels for chi-squared goodness-of-fit statistics. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 73: 253бҺҗ263.
Larsen, K., J. H. Petersen, E. Budtz-JoЦҖ rgensen, and L. Endahl. 2000. Interpreting parameters in
the logistic regression model with random effects. Biometrics 56: 909бҺҗ914.
Larson, M. G. 1984. Covariate analysis of competing-risks data with log-linear models. Biometrics 40: 459бҺҗ469.
Lauritzen, S. L. 1996. Graphical Models. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lauritzen, S. L., and N. Wermuth. 1989. Graphical models for associations between variables, some of which are qualitative and some quantitative. Ann. Statist. 17: 31бҺҗ57.
LaVange, L. M., G. G. Koch, and T. A. Schwartz. 2001. Applying sample survey methods to clinical trials data. Statist. Medic. 20: 2609бҺҗ2623.
Lawal, H. B. 1984. Comparisons of the X 2, Y 2, FreemanбҺҗTukey and Williams improved G2 test statistics in small samples of one-way multinomials. Biometrika 71: 415бҺҗ418.
Lawless, J. F. 1987. Negative binomial and mixed Poisson regression. Canad. J. Statist. 15: 209бҺҗ225.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., and N. W. Henry. 1968. Latent Structure Analysis. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Lee, S. K. 1977. On the asymptotic variances of ЛҶu terms in loglinear models of multidimensional
contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 72: 412бҺҗ419.

676

REFERENCES

Lee, Y., and J. A. Nelder. 1996. Hierarchical generalized linear models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser B 58: 619бҺҗ678.
Lefkopoulou, M., D. Moore, and L. Ryan. 1989. The analysis of multiple correlated binary outcomes: Application to rodent teratology experiments. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 810бҺҗ815.
Lehmann, E. L. 1966. Some concepts of dependence. Ann. Math. Statist. 37: 1137бҺҗ1153.
Lehmann, E. L. 1986. Testing Statistical Hypotheses, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Leonard, T. 1975. Bayesian estimation methods for two-way contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 37: 23бҺҗ37.
Leonard, T. and J. S. J. Hsu. 1994. The Bayesian analysis of categorical data: A selective review. Pp. 283бҺҗ310 in Aspects of Uncertainty: A Tribute to D. V. Lindley. P. R. Freeman and A. F. M. Smith, eds. New York: Wiley.
Lesaffre, E., and A. Albert. 1989. Multiple-group logistic regression diagnostics. Appl. Statist. 38: 425бҺҗ440.
Lesaffre, E., and G. Molenberghs. 1991. Multivariate probit analysis: A neglected procedure in medical statistics. Statist. Medic. 10: 1391бҺҗ1403.
Lesaffre, E., and B. Spiessens. 2001. On the effect of quadrature points in a logistic randomeffects model: An example. Appl. Statist. 50: 325бҺҗ335.
Lewis, T., I. W. Saunders, and M. Westcott. 1984. The moments of the Pearson chi-squared statistic and the minimum expected value in two-way tables. Biometrika 71: 515бҺҗ522.
Liang, K. Y. 1984. The asymptotic efficiency of conditional likelihood methods. Biometrika 71: 305бҺҗ313.
Liang, K. Y., and J. Hanfelt. 1994. On the use of the quasi-likelihood method in teratological experiments. Biometrics 50: 872бҺҗ880.
Liang, K. Y., and P. McCullagh. 1993. Case studies in binary dispersion. Biometrics 49: 623бҺҗ630.
Liang, K. Y., and S. G. Self. 1985. Tests for homogeneity of odds ratios when the data are sparse. Biometrika 72: 353бҺҗ358.
Liang, K. Y., and S. L. Zeger. 1986. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models. Biometrika 73: 13бҺҗ22.
Liang, K. Y., and S. L. Zeger. 1988. On the use of concordant pairs in matched caseбҺҗcontrol studies. Biometrics 44: 1145бҺҗ1156.
Liang, K. Y, and S. L. Zeger. 1995. Inference based on estimating functions in the presence of nuisance parameters. Statist. Sci. 10 158бҺҗ173.
Liang, K. Y., S. L. Zeger, and B. Qaqish. 1992. Multivariate regression analyses for categorical data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc.Ser. B 54: 3бҺҗ24.
Lin, X. 1997. Variance component testing in generalized linear models with random effects. Biometrika 84: 309бҺҗ326.
Lindley, D. V. 1964. The Bayesian analysis of contingency tables. Ann. Math. Statist. 35: 1622бҺҗ1643.
Lindsay, B., C. Clogg, and J. Grego. 1991. Semi-parametric estimation in the Rasch model and related exponential response models, including a simple latent class model for item analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 86: 96бҺҗ107.
Lindsey, J. K. 1999. Models for Repeated Measurements, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lindsey, J. K., and P. M. E. Altham. 1998. Analysis of the human sex ratio by using overdispersion models. Appl. Statist. 47: 149бҺҗ157.
Lindsey, J. K., and G. Mersch. 1992. Fitting and comparing probability distributions with log linear models. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 13: 373бҺҗ384.
Lipsitz, S. 1992. Methods for estimating the parameters of a linear model for ordered categorical data. Biometrics 48: 271бҺҗ281.

REFERENCES

677

Lipsitz, S. R., and G. Fitzmaurice. 1996. The score test for independence in R = C contingency tables with missing data. Biometrics 52: 751бҺҗ762.
Lipsitz, S., N. Laird, and D. Harrington. 1990. Finding the design matrix for the marginal homogeneity model. Biometrika 77: 353бҺҗ358.
Lipsitz, S., N. Laird, and D. Harrington. 1991. Generalized estimating equations for correlated binary data: Using the odds ratio as a measure of association. Biometrika 78: 153бҺҗ160.
Lipsitz, S. R., K. Kim, and L. Zhao. 1994. Analysis of repeated categorical data using generalized estimating equations. Statist. Medic. 13: 1149бҺҗ1163.
Little, R. J. 1989. Testing the equality of two independent binomial proportions. Amer. Statist. 43: 283бҺҗ288.
Little, R. J. 1998. Missing data. Pp. 2622бҺҗ2635 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Little, R. J., and D. B. Rubin. 1987. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. New York: Wiley.
Little, R. J. A., and M.-M. Wu. 1991. Models for contingency tables with known margins when target and sampled populations differ. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 86: 87бҺҗ95.
Liu, Q., and D. A. Pierce. 1993. Heterogeneity in MantelбҺҗHaenszel-type models. Biometrika 80: 543бҺҗ556.
Liu, Q., and D. A. Pierce. 1994. A note on GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature. Biometrika 81: 624бҺҗ629. Lloyd, C. J. 1988a. Some issues arising from the analysis of 2 = 2 contingency tables. Austral. J.
Statist. 30: 35бҺҗ46. Lloyd, C. J. 1988b. Doubling the one-sided P-value in testing independence in 2 = 2 tables
against a two-sided alternative. Statist. Medic. 7: 1297бҺҗ1306.
Lloyd, C. J. 1999. Statistical Analysis of Categorical Data. New York: Wiley.
Longford, N. T. 1993. Random Coefficient Models. New York: Oxford University Press.
Loughin, T. M., and P. N. Scherer. 1998. Testing for association in contingency tables with multiple column responses. Biometrics 54: 630бҺҗ637.
Louis, T. A. 1982. Finding the observed information matrix when using the EM algorithm. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 44: 226бҺҗ233.
Luce, R. D. 1959. IndiВ®idual Choice BehaВ®ior. New York: Wiley.
Madansky, A. 1963. Tests of homogeneity for correlated samples. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 58: 97бҺҗ119.
Maddala, G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and QualitatiВ®e Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Magnus, J. R., and H. Neudecker. 1988. Matrix Differential Calculus with Applications in Statistics and Econometrics. New York: Wiley.
Mantel, N. 1963. Chi-square tests with one degree of freedom: Extensions of the MantelбҺҗHaenszel procedure. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 58: 690бҺҗ700.
Mantel, N. 1966. Models for complex contingency tables and polychotomous dosage response curves. Biometrics 22: 83бҺҗ95.
Mantel, N. 1973. Synthetic retrospective studies and related topics. Biometrics 29: 479бҺҗ486. Mantel, N. 1985. Maximum likelihood vs. minimum chi-square. Biometrics 41: 777бҺҗ781.
Mantel, N. 1987a. Understanding WaldвҖҷs test for exponential families. Amer. Statist. 41: 147бҺҗ148.
Mantel, N. 1987b. Exact tests for 2 = 2 contingency tables ЕҪLetter.. Amer. Statist. 41: 159.
Mantel, N., and D. P. Byar. 1978. Marginal homogeneity, symmetry and independence. Commun. Statist. Ser. A 7: 953бҺҗ976.
Mantel, N., and W. Haenszel. 1959. Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from retrospective studies of disease. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 22: 719бҺҗ748.

678

REFERENCES

MartВҙin AndrВҙes, A., and Silva Mato, A. 1994. Choosing the optimal unconditional test for
comparing two independent proportions. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 17: 555бҺҗ574.
Matthews, J. N. S., and K. P. Morris. 1995. An application of BradleyбҺҗTerry-type models to the measurement of pain. Appl. Statist. 44: 243бҺҗ255.
McCullagh, P. 1978. A class of parametric models for the analysis of square contingency tables with ordered categories. Biometrika 65: 413бҺҗ418.
McCullagh, P. 1980. Regression models for ordinal data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 42: 109бҺҗ142.
McCullagh, P. 1982. Some applications of quasisymmetry. Biometrika 69: 303бҺҗ308.
McCullagh, P. 1983. Quasi-likelihood functions. Ann. Statist. 11: 59бҺҗ67.
McCullagh, P. 1986. The conditional distribution of goodness-of-fit statistics for discrete data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 104бҺҗ107.
McCullagh, P., and J. A. Nelder. 1983; 2nd ed., 1989. Generalized Linear Models. London: Chapman & Hall.
McCulloch, C. E. 1994. Maximum likelihood variance components estimation for binary data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 89: 330бҺҗ335.
McCulloch, C. E. 1997. Maximum likelihood algorithms for generalized linear mixed models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 92: 162бҺҗ170.
McCulloch, C. E. 2000. Generalized linear models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 95: 1320бҺҗ1324.
McCulloch, C. E., and S. Searle. 2001. Generalized, Linear, and Mixed Models. New York: Wiley.
McFadden, D. 1974. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. Pp. 105бҺҗ142 in Frontiers in Econometrics, ed. P. Zarembka. New York: Academic Press.
McFadden, D. 1982. Qualitative response models. Pp. 1бҺҗ37 in AdВ®ances in Econometrics, ed. W. Hildebrand. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNemar, Q. 1947. Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages. Psychometrika 12: 153бҺҗ157.
Mee, R. W. 1984. Confidence bounds for the difference between two probabilities ЕҪletter.. Biometrics 40: 1175бҺҗ1176.
Meeden, G., C. Geyer, J. Lang, and E. Funo. 1998. The admissibility of the maximum likelihood estimator for decomposable log-linear interaction models for contingency tables. Commun. Statist. Ser. A 27: 473бҺҗ493.
Mehta, C. R. 1994. The exact analysis of contingency tables in medical research. Statist. Methods Medic. Res. 3: 135бҺҗ156.
Mehta, C. R., and N. R. Patel. 1983. A network algorithm for performing FisherвҖҷs exact test in r = c contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 78: 427бҺҗ434.
Mehta, C. R., and N. R. Patel. 1995. Exact logistic regression: Theory and examples. Statist. Medic. 14: 2143бҺҗ2160.
Mehta, C. R., and S. J. Walsh. 1992. Comparison of exact, mid-P, and MantelбҺҗHaenszel confidence intervals for the common odds ratio across several 2 = 2 contingency tables. Amer. Statist. 46: 146бҺҗ150.
Mehta, C. R., N. R. Patel, and R. Gray. 1985. Computing an exact confidence interval for the common odds ratio in several 2 by 2 contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 80: 969бҺҗ973.
Mehta, C. R., N. R. Patel, and P. Senchaudhuri. 1988. Importance sampling for estimating exact probabilities in permutational inference. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 999бҺҗ1005.
Mehta, C. R., N. R. Patel, and P. Senchaudhuri. 2000. Efficient Monte Carlo methods for conditional logistic regression. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 95: 99бҺҗ108.
Michailidis, G., and J. de Leeuw. 1998. The Gifi system of descriptive multivariate analysis. Statist. Sci. 13: 307бҺҗ336.

REFERENCES

679

Miettinen, O. S. 1969. Individual matching with multiple controls in the case of all-or-none responses. Biometrics 25: 339бҺҗ355.
Miettinen, O. S., and M. Nurminen. 1985. Comparative analysis of two rates. Statist. Medic. 4: 213бҺҗ226.
Miller, M. E., C. S. Davis, and J. R. Landis. 1993. The analysis of longitudinal polytomous data: Generalized estimating equations and connections with weighted least squares. Biometrics 49: 1033бҺҗ1044.
Minkin, S. 1987. On optimal design for binary data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 1098бҺҗ1103.
Mirkin, B. 2001. Eleven ways to look at the chi-squared coefficient for contingency tables. Amer. Statist. 55: 111бҺҗ120.
Mitra, S. K. 1958. On the limiting power function of the frequency chi-square test. Ann. Statist. 29: 1221бҺҗ1233.
Molenberghs, G., and E. Goetghebeur. 1997. Simple fitting algorithms for incomplete categorical data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 59: 401бҺҗ414.
Molenberghs, G., and E. Lesaffre. 1994. Marginal modeling of correlated ordinal data using a multivariate Plackett distribution. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 89: 633бҺҗ644.
Molenberghs, G., M. G. Kenward, and E. Lesaffre. 1997. The analysis of longitudinal ordinal data with nonrandom drop-out. Biometrika 84: 33бҺҗ44.
Moore, D. F. 1986a. Asymptotic properties of moment estimates for overdispersed counts and proportions. Biometrika 35: 583бҺҗ588.
Moore, D. S. 1986b. Tests of chi-squared type. Pp. 63бҺҗ95 in Goodness-of-Fit Techniques, ed. R. DвҖҷAgostino and M. A. Stephens. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Moore, D. F., and A. Tsiatis. 1991. Robust estimation of the variance in moment methods for extra-binomial and extra-Poisson variation. Biometrics 47: 383бҺҗ401.
Morgan, B. J. T. 1992. Analysis of Quantal Response Data. London: Chapman & Hall.
Morgan, W. M., and B. A. Blumenstein. 1991. Exact conditional tests for hierarchical models in multidimensional contingency tables. Appl. Statist. 40: 435бҺҗ442.
Mosimann, J. E. 1962. On the compound multinomial distribution, the multivariate вҗӨ-distribution and correlations among proportions. Biometrika 49: 65бҺҗ82.
Mosteller, F. 1951. Remarks on the method of paired comparisons I: The least-squares solution assuming equal standard deviations and equal correlations. Psychometrika 16: 3бҺҗ9.
Mosteller, F. 1952. Some statistical problems in measuring the subjective response to drugs. Biometrics 8: 220бҺҗ226.
Mosteller, F. 1968. Association and estimation in contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 63: 1бҺҗ28.
Nair, V. N. 1987. Chi-squared-type tests for ordered alternatives in contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 283бҺҗ291.
Natarajan, R., and C. McCulloch. 1995. A note on the existence of the posterior distribution for a class of mixed models for binomial responses. Biometrika 82: 639бҺҗ643.
Natarajan, R., and C. McCulloch. 1998. Gibbs sampling with diffuse proper priors: A valid approach to data-driven inference? J. Comput. Graph. Statist. 7: 267бҺҗ277.
Nelder, J., and D. Pregibon. 1987. An extended quasi-likelihood function. Biometrika 74: 221бҺҗ232.
Nelder, J., and R. W. M. Wedderburn. 1972. Generalized linear models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 135: 370бҺҗ384.
Nerlove, M., and S. J. Press. 1973. Univariate and multivariate log-linear and logistic models. Technical Report R-1306-EDArNIH, Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Neuhaus, J. M. 1992. Statistical methods for longitudinal and clustered designs with binary responses. Statist. Methods Medic. Res. 1: 249бҺҗ273.

680

REFERENCES

Neuhaus, J. M., and N. P. Jewell. 1990a. Some comments on RosnerвҖҷs multiple logistic model for clustered data. Biometrics 46: 523бҺҗ534.
Neuhaus, J. M., and N. P. Jewell. 1990b. The effect of retrospective sampling on binary regression models for clustered data. Biometrics 46: 977бҺҗ990.
Neuhaus, J. M., and M. L. Lesperance. 1996. Estimation efficiency in a binary mixed-effects model setting. Biometrika 83: 441бҺҗ446.
Neuhaus, J. M., J. D. Kalbfleisch, and W. W. Hauck. 1991. A comparison of cluster-specific and population-averaged approaches for analyzing correlated binary data. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 59: 25бҺҗ35.
Neuhaus, J. M., W. W. Hauck, and J. D. Kalbfleisch. 1992. The effects of mixture distribution misspecification when fitting mixed-effects logistic models. Biometrika 79: 755бҺҗ762.
Neuhaus, J. M., J. D. Kalbfleisch, and W. W. Hauck. 1994. Conditions for consistent estimation in mixed-effects models for binary matched-pairs data. Canad. J. Statist. 22: 139бҺҗ148.
Newcombe, R. 1998a. Two-sided confidence intervals for the single proportion: Comparison of seven methods. Statist. Medic. 17: 857бҺҗ872.
Newcombe, R. 1998b. Interval estimation for the difference between independent proportions: Comparison of eleven methods. Statist. Medic. 17: 873бҺҗ890.
Newcombe, R. 2001. Logit confidence intervals and the inverse sinh transformation. Amer. Statist. 55: 200бҺҗ202.
Neyman, J. 1935. On the problem of confidence limits. Ann. Math. Statist. 6: 111бҺҗ116. Neyman, J. 1949. Contributions to the theory of the вҗ№ 2 test. Pp. 239бҺҗ273 in Proc. First Berkeley
Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, ed. J. Neyman. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Nurminen, M. 1986. Confidence intervals for the ratio and difference of two binomial proportions. Biometrics 42: 675бҺҗ676.
OвҖҷBrien, P. C. 1988. Comparing two samples: Extensions of the t, rank-sum, and log-rank tests. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 52бҺҗ61.
OвҖҷBrien, R. G. 1986. Using the SAS system to perform power analyses for log-linear models. Pp. 778бҺҗ784 in Proc. 11th Annual SAS Users Group Conference. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
Ochi, Y., and R. Prentice. 1984. Likelihood inference in a correlated probit regression model. Biometrika 71: 531бҺҗ543.
OвҖҷGorman, T. W., and R. F. Woolson. 1988. Analysis of ordered categorical data using the SAS system. Pp. 957бҺҗ963 in Proc. 13th Annual SAS Users Group Conference. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
Paik, M. 1985. A graphic representation of a three-way contingency table: SimpsonвҖҷs paradox and correlation. Amer. Statist. 39: 53бҺҗ54.
Palmgren, J. 1981. The Fisher information matrix for log-linear models arguing conditionally in the observed explanatory variables. Biometrika 68: 563бҺҗ566.
Palmgren, J., and A. Ekholm. 1987. Exponential family non-linear models for categorical data with errors of observation. Appl. Stochastic Models Data Anal. 3: 111бҺҗ124.
Park, T., and M. B. Brown. 1994. Models for categorical data with nonignorable nonresponse. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 89: 44бҺҗ52.
Parr, W. C., and H. D. Tolley. 1982. Jackknifing in categorical data analysis. Austral. J. Statist. 24: 67бҺҗ79.
Parzen, E. 1997. Concrete statistics. Pp. 309бҺҗ332 in Statistics of Quality. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Patefield, W. M. 1982. Exact tests for trends in ordered contingency tables. Appl. Statist. Ser B 31: 32бҺҗ43.

REFERENCES

681

Patnaik, P. B. 1949. The non-central вҗ№ 2 and F-distributions and their applications. Biometrika 36: 202бҺҗ232.
Paul, S. R., K. Y. Liang, and S. G. Self. 1989. On testing departure from the binomial and multinomial assumptions. Biometrics 45: 231бҺҗ236.
Pearson, E. S. 1947. The choice of a statistical test illustrated on the interpretation of data classified in 2 = 2 tables. Biometrika 34: 139бҺҗ167.
Pearson, K. 1900. On a criterion that a given system of deviations from the probable in the case of a correlated system of variables is such that it can be reasonably supposed to have arisen from random sampling. Philos. Mag. Ser. 5 50: 157бҺҗ175. ЕҪReprinted in Karl PearsonвҖҷs Early Statistical Papers, ed. E. S. Pearson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1948..
Pearson, K. 1904. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution XIII: On the theory of contingency and its relation to association and normal correlation. DraperвҖҷs Co. Research Memoirs, Biometric Series, no. 1. ЕҪReprinted in Karl PearsonвҖҷs Early Papers, ed. E. S. Pearson, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1948..
Pearson, K. 1913. On the probable error of a correlation coefficient as found from a fourfold table. Biometrika 9: 22бҺҗ27.
Pearson, K. 1917. On the general theory of multiple contingency with special reference to partial contingency. Biometrika 11: 145бҺҗ158.
Pearson, K. 1922. On the вҗ№ 2 test of goodness of fit. Biometrika 14: 186бҺҗ191.
Pearson, K., and D. Heron. 1913. On theories of association. Biometrika 9: 159бҺҗ315.
Peduzzi, P., J. Concato, E. Kemper, T. R. Holford, and A. R. Feinstein. 1996. A simulation study of the number of events per variable in logistic regression analysis. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 49: 1373бҺҗ1379.
Pendergast, J. F., S. J. Gange, M. A. Newton, M. J. Lindstrom, M. Palta, and M. R. Fisher. 1996. A survey of methods for analyzing clustered binary response data. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 64: 89бҺҗ118.
Pepe, M. S. 2000. Receiver operating characteristic methodology. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 95: 308бҺҗ311.
Peterson, B., and F. E. Harrell, Jr. 1990. Partial proportional odds models for ordinal response variables. Appl. Statist. 39: 205бҺҗ217.
Pierce, D. A., and D. Peters. 1992. Practical use of higher order asymptotics for multiparameter exponential families. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 54: 701бҺҗ725.
Pierce, D. A., and D. Peters. 1999. Improving on exact tests by approximate conditioning. Biometrika 86: 265бҺҗ277.
Pierce, D. A., and B. R. Sands. 1975. Extra-Bernoulli variation in regression of binary data. Technical Report 46, Statistics Deptartment, Oregon State University, Cornwallis, OR.
Pierce, D. A., and D. W. Schafer. 1986. Residuals in generalized linear models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 977бҺҗ983.
Plackett, R. L. 1962. A note on interactions in contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 24: 162бҺҗ166.
Plackett, R. L. 1964. The continuity correction in 2 = 2 tables. Biometrika 51: 327бҺҗ337. Plackett, R. L. 1983. Karl Pearson and the chi-squared test. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 51: 59бҺҗ72.
Podgor, M. J., J. L. Gastwirth, and C. R. Mehta. 1996. Efficiency robust tests of independence in contingency tables with ordered classifications. Statist. Medic. 15: 2095бҺҗ2105.
Poisson, S.-D. 1837. Recherches sur la probabilitВҙe des jugements en matie`ere criminelle et en mati`ere ciВ®ile, prВҙecВҙedВҙees des r`egles gВҙenВҙerales du calcul des probabilitВҙes. Paris: Bachelier.
Pratt, J. W. 1981. Concavity of the log likelihood. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 76: 103бҺҗ106.
Pregibon, D. 1980. Goodness of link tests for generalized linear models. Appl. Statist. 29: 15бҺҗ24. Pregibon, D. 1981. Logistic regression diagnostics. Ann. Statist. 9: 705бҺҗ724.

682

REFERENCES

Pregibon, D. 1982. Score tests in GLIM with application. Pp. 87бҺҗ97 in Lecture Notes in Statistics, 14: GLIM 82, Proc. International Conference on Generalised Linear Models, ed. R. Gilchrist. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Prentice, R. 1976a. Use of the logistic model in retrospective studies. Biometrics 32: 599бҺҗ606.
Prentice, R. 1976b. Generalization of the probit and logit methods for dose response curves. Biometrics 32: 761бҺҗ768.
Prentice, R. 1986. Binary regression using an extended beta-binomial distribution, with discussion of correlation induced by covariate measurement errors. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 321бҺҗ327.
Prentice, R., and N. Breslow. 1978. Retrospective studies and failure time models. Biometrika 65: 153бҺҗ158.
Prentice, R., and L. A. Gloeckler. 1978. Regression analysis of grouped survival data with application to breast cancer data. Biometrics 34: 57бҺҗ67.
Prentice, R., and R. Pyke. 1979. Logistic disease incidence models and case-control studies. Biometrika 66: 403бҺҗ412.
Prentice, R., and L. P. Zhao. 1991. Estimating equations for parameters in means and covariances of multivariate discrete and continuous responses. Biometrics 47: 825бҺҗ839.
Press, S. J., and S. Wilson. 1978. Choosing between logistic regression and discriminant analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 73: 699бҺҗ705.
Qu, A., B. G. Lindsay, and B. Li. 2000. Improving generalised estimating equations using quadratic inference functions. Biometrika 87: 823бҺҗ836.
Quine, M. P., and E. Seneta. 1987. BortkiewiczвҖҷs data and the law of small numbers. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 5: 173бҺҗ181.
Rabe-Hesketh, S., and A. Skrondal. 2001. Parameterisation of multivariate random effects models for categorical data. Biometrics 57:бҺҗ.
Raftery, A. E. 1986. Choosing models for cross-classification. Amer. Sociol. ReВ®. 51: 145бҺҗ146.
Rao, C. R. 1957. Maximum likelihood estimation for the multinomial distribution. Sankhya 18: 139бҺҗ148.
Rao, C. R. 1963. Criteria of estimation in large samples. Sankhya 25: 189бҺҗ206.
Rao, C. R. 1973. Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Rao, C. R. 1982. Diversity: Its measurement, decomposition, apportionment, and analysis. Sankhya Ser. A 44: 1бҺҗ22.
Rao, J. N. K., and A. J. Scott. 1987. On simple adjustments to chi-square tests with sample survey data. Ann. Statist. 15: 385бҺҗ397.
Rao, J. N. K., and D. R. Thomas. 1988. The analysis of cross-classified categorical data from complex sample surveys. Sociol. Methodol. 18: 213бҺҗ270.
Rasch, G. 1961. On general laws and the meaning of measurement in psychology. Pp. 321бҺҗ333 in Proc. 4 th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematics, Statistics, and Probability, Vol. 4, ed. J. Neyman. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Rayner, J. C. W., and D. J. Best. 2001. A Contingency Table Approach to Nonparametric Testing. London: Chapman & Hall.
Read, T. R. C., and N. A. C. Cressie. 1988. Goodness-of-Fit Statistics for Discrete MultiВ®ariate Data. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Rice, W. R. 1988. A new probability model for determining exact P-values for 2 = 2 contingency tables when comparing binomial proportions. Biometrics 44: 1бҺҗ22.
Ritov, Y., and Z. Gilula. 1991. The order-restricted RC model for ordered contingency tables: Estimation and testing for fit. Ann. Statist. 19: 2090бҺҗ2101.
Robins, J., N. Breslow, and S. Greenland. 1986. Estimators of the MantelбҺҗHaenszel variance consistent in both sparse data and large-strata limiting models. Biometrics 42: 311бҺҗ323.

REFERENCES

683

Robins, J., A. Rotnitzky, and L. P. Zhao. 1995. Analysis of semiparametric regression models for repeated outcomes in the presence of missing data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 90: 106бҺҗ121.
RВЁohmel, J., and U. Mansmann. 1999. Unconditional non-asymptotic one-sided tests for indepen-
dent binomial proportions when the interest lies in showing non-inferiority andror superiority. Biometrical J. 41: 149бҺҗ170.
Rosenbaum, P. R., and D. R. Rubin. 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70: 41бҺҗ55.
Rosner, B. 1984. Multivariate methods in ophthalmology with application to other paired-data situations. Biometrics 40: 1025бҺҗ1035.
Rosner, B. 1989. Multivariate methods for clustered binary data with more than one level of nesting. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 373бҺҗ380.
Rotnitzky, A., and N. P. Jewell. 1990. Hypothesis testing of regression parameters in semiparametric generalized linear models for cluster correlated data. Biometrika 77: 485бҺҗ497.
Routledge, R. D. 1992. Resolving the conflict over FisherвҖҷs exact test. Canad. J. Statist. 20: 201бҺҗ209.
Routledge, R. D. 1994. Practicing safe statistics with the mid-P*. Canad. J. Statist. 22: 103бҺҗ110.
Roy, S. N., and M. A. Kastenbaum. 1956. On the hypothesis of no вҖҳвҖҳinteractionвҖҷвҖҷ in a multiway contingency table. Ann. Math. Statist. 27: 749бҺҗ757.
Roy, S. N., and S. K. Mitra. 1956. An introduction to some nonparametric generalizations of analysis of variance and multivariate analysis. Biometrika 43: 361бҺҗ376.
Rudas, T., C. C. Clogg, and B. G. Lindsay. 1994. A new index of fit based on mixture methods for the analysis of contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 56: 623бҺҗ639.
Ryan, L. 1992. Quantitative risk assessment for developmental toxicity. Biometrics 48: 163бҺҗ174.
Ryan, L. 1995. Comment on article by Liang and Zeger. Statist. Sci. 10: 189бҺҗ193.
Samuels, M. L. 1993. SimpsonвҖҷs paradox and related phenomena. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88: 81бҺҗ88.
Santner, T. J., and M. K. Snell. 1980. Small-sample confidence intervals for p1бҺҗp2 and p1rp2 in 2 = 2 contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 75: 386бҺҗ394.
Santner, T. J., and S. Yamagami. 1993. Invariant small sample confidence intervals for the difference of two success probabilities. Commun. Statist. Ser. B 22: 33бҺҗ59.
Schafer, J. L. 1997. Analysis of Incomplete MultiВ®ariate Data. London: Chapman & Hall.
Schluchter, M. D., and K. L. Jackson. 1989. Log-linear analysis of censored survival data with partially observed covariates. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 84: 42бҺҗ52.
Scott, A., and C. Wild. 2001. CaseбҺҗcontrol studies with complex sampling. Appl. Statist. 50: 389бҺҗ401.
Seeber, G. 1998. Poisson regression. Pp. 3404бҺҗ3412 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Sekar, C. C., and W. E. Deming. 1949. On a method of estimating birth and death rates and the extent of registration. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 44: 101бҺҗ115.
Self, S. G., and K.-Y. Liang. 1987. Asymptotic properties of maximum likelihood estimators and likelihood ratio tests under nonstandard conditions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82: 605бҺҗ610.
Sen, P. K., and J. M. Singer. 1993. Large Sample Methods in Statistics: An Introduction with Applications. London: Chapman & Hall.
Shapiro, S. H. 1982. Collapsing contingency tables: A geometric approach. Amer. Statist. 36: 43бҺҗ46.
Shuster, J., and D. Downing. 1976. Two-way contingency tables for complex sampling schemes. Biometrika 63: 271бҺҗ276.
Silvapulle, M. J. 1981. On the existence of maximum likelihood estimators for the binomial response models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 43: 310бҺҗ313.

684

REFERENCES

Simon, G. 1973. Additivity of information in exponential family probability laws. . J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 68: 478бҺҗ482.
Simon, G. 1974. Alternative analyses for the singly-ordered contingency table. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 69: 971бҺҗ976.
Simon, G. 1978. Efficacies of measures of association for ordinal contingency tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 73: 545бҺҗ551.
Simonoff, J. 1983. A penalty function approach to smoothing large sparse contingency tables. Ann. Statist. 11: 208бҺҗ218.
Simonoff, J. 1986. Jackknifing and bootstrapping goodness-of-fit statistics in sparse multinomials. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81: 1005бҺҗ1111.
Simonoff, J. S. 1996. Smoothing Methods in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Simonoff, J. S. 1998. Three sides of smoothing: Categorical data smoothing, nonparametric regression, and density estimation. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 66: 137бҺҗ156.
Simpson, E. H. 1949. The measurement of diversity. Nature 163: 699.
Simpson, E. H. 1951. The interpretation of interaction in contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 13: 238бҺҗ241.
Skellam, J. G. 1948. A probability distribution derived from the binomial distribution by regarding the probability of success as variable between the sets of trials. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 10: 257бҺҗ261.
Skene, A. M., and J. C. Wakefield. 1990. Hierarchical models for multicentre binary response studies. Statist. Medic. 9: 919бҺҗ929.
Slaton, T. L., W. W. Piegorsch, and S. D. Durham. 2000. Estimation and testing with overdispersed proportions using the beta-logistic regression model of Heckman and Willis. Biometrics 56: 125бҺҗ133.
Small, K. A. 1987. A discrete choice model for ordered alternatives. Econometrica 55: 409бҺҗ424.
Smith, K. W. 1976. Table standardization and table shrinking: Aids in the traditional analysis of contingency tables. Social Forces 54: 669бҺҗ693.
Smith, P. W. F., J. J. Forster, and J. W. McDonald. 1996. Monte Carlo exact tests for square contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 159: 309бҺҗ321.
Snell, E. J. 1964. A scaling procedure for ordered categorical data. Biometrics 20: 592бҺҗ607.
Somers, R. H. 1962. A new asymmetric measure of association for ordinal variables. Amer. Sociol. ReВ®. 27: 799бҺҗ811.
Speed, T. 1998. Iterative proportional fitting. Pp. 2116бҺҗ2119 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Spiegelhalter, D. J., and A. F. M. Smith. 1982. Bayes factors for linear and log-linear models with vague prior information. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 44: 377бҺҗ387.
Spitzer, R. L., J. Cohen, J. L. Fleiss, and J. Endicott. 1967. Quantification of agreement in psychiatric diagnosis. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 17: 83бҺҗ87.
Sprott, D. A. 2000. Statistical Inference in Science. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Stern, S. 1997. Simulation-based estimation. J. Econ. Literature 35: 2006бҺҗ2039.
Sterne, T. E. 1954. Some remarks on confidence or fiducial limits. Biometrika 41: 275бҺҗ278.
Stevens, S. S. 1951. Mathematics, measurement, and psychophysics. Pp. 1бҺҗ49 in Handbook of Experimental Psychology, ed. S. S. Stevens. New York: Wiley.
Stevens, W. L. 1950. Fiducial limits of the parameter of a discontinuous distribution. Biometrika 37: 117бҺҗ129.
Stigler, S. 1986. The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

REFERENCES

685

Stigler, S. 1994. Citation patterns in the journals of statistics and probability. Statist. Sci. 9: 94бҺҗ108.
Stigler, S. 1999. Statistics on the Table. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stiratelli, R., N. Laird, and J. H. Ware. 1984. Random-effects models for serial observations with binary response. Biometrics 40: 1025бҺҗ1035.
Stokes, M. E., C. S. Davis, and G. G. Koch. 2000. Categorical Data Analysis Using the SAS System, 2nd ed. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
Strawderman, R. L., and M. T. Wells. 1998. Approximately exact inference for the common odds ratio in several 2 = 2 tables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 93: 1294бҺҗ1307.
Stuart, A. 1955. A test for homogeneity of the marginal distributions in a two-way classification. Biometrika 42: 412бҺҗ416.
Stukel, T. A. 1988. Generalized logistic models. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 83: 426бҺҗ431.
Suissa, S., and J. J. Shuster. 1984. Are uniformly most powerful unbiased tests really best? Amer. Statist. 38: 204бҺҗ206.
Suissa, S., and J. J. Shuster. 1985. Exact unconditional samples sizes for the 2 by 2 binomial trial. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 148: 317бҺҗ327.
Suissa, S., and J. J. Shuster. 1991. The 2 = 2 matched-pairs trial: Exact unconditional design and analysis. Biometrics 47: 361бҺҗ372.
Sundberg, R. 1975. Some results about decomposable ЕҪor Markov-type. models for multidimensional contingency tables: Distribution of marginals and partitioning of tests. Scand. J. Statist. 2: 71бҺҗ79.
Tango, T. 1998. Equivalence test and confidence interval for the difference in proportions for the paired-sample design. Statist. Medic. 17: 891бҺҗ908.
Tanner, M. A., and M. A. Young. 1985. Modelling agreement among raters. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 80: 175бҺҗ180.
Tarone, R. E. 1985. On heterogeneity tests based on efficient scores. Biometrika 72: 91бҺҗ95.
Tarone, R. E., and J. J. Gart. 1980. On the robustness of combined tests for trends in proportions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 75: 110бҺҗ116.
Tarone, R. E., J. J. Gart, and W. W. Hauck. 1983. On the asymptotic relative efficiency of certain noniterative estimators of a common relative risk or odds ratio. Biometrika 70: 519бҺҗ522.
TavarВҙe, S., and P. M. E. Altham. 1983. Serial dependence of observations leading to contingency
tables, and corrections to chi-squared statistics. Biometrika 70: 139бҺҗ144.
Ten Have, T. R. 1996. A mixed effects model for multivariate ordinal response data including correlated discrete failure times with ordinal responses. Biometrics 52: 473бҺҗ491.
Ten Have, T. R., and A. R. Localio. 1999. Empirical Bayes estimation of random effects parameters in mixed effects logistic regression models. Biometrics 55: 1022бҺҗ1029.
Ten Have, T. R., and A. Morabia. 1999. Mixed effects models with bivariate and univariate association parameters for longitudinal bivariate binary response data. Biometrics 55: 85бҺҗ93.
Ten Have, T. R., and D. H. Uttal. 1994. Subject-specific and population-averaged continuation ratio logit models for multiple discrete time survival profiles. Appl. Statist. 43: 371бҺҗ384.
Theil, H. 1969. A multinomial extension of the linear logit model. Internat. Econ. ReВ®. 10: 251бҺҗ259.
Theil, H. 1970. On the estimation of relationships involving qualitative variables. Amer. J. Sociol. 76: 103бҺҗ154.
Thompson, R., and R. J. Baker. 1981. Composite link functions in generalized linear models. Appl. Statist. 30: 125бҺҗ131.

686

REFERENCES

Thompson, W. A. 1977. On the treatment of grouped observations in life studies. Biometrics 33: 463бҺҗ470.
Thurstone, L. L. 1927. The method of paired comparisons for social values. J. Abnormal Social Psych. 21: 384бҺҗ400.
Tjur, T. 1982. A connection between RaschвҖҷs item analysis model and a multiplicative Poisson model. Scand. J. Statist. 9: 23бҺҗ30.
Tocher, K. D. 1950. Extension of the NeymanбҺҗPearson theory of tests to discontinuous variates. Biometrika 37: 130бҺҗ144.
Toledano, A., and C. Gatsonis. 1996. Ordinal regression methodology for ROC curves derived from correlated data. Statist. Medic. 15: 1807бҺҗ1826.
Train, K. 1986. QualitatiВ®e Choice Analysis: Theory, Econometrics, and an Application. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tsiatis, A. A. 1980. A note on the goodness-of-fit test for the logistic regression model. Biometrika 67: 250бҺҗ251.
Tutz, G. 1989. Compound regression models for ordered categorical data. Biometrical J. 31: 259бҺҗ272.
Tutz, G. 1991. Sequential models in categorical regression. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 11: 275бҺҗ295.
Tutz, G., and W. Hennevogl. 1996. Random effects in ordinal regression models. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 22: 537бҺҗ557.
Uebersax, J. S. 1993. Statistical modeling of expert ratings on medical treatment appropriateness. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88: 421бҺҗ427.
Uebersax, J. S., and W. M. Grove. 1990. Latent class analysis of diagnostic agreement. Statist. Medic. 9: 559бҺҗ572.
Uebersax, J. S., and W. M. Grove. 1993. A latent trait finite mixture model for the analysis of rating agreement. Biometrics 49: 823бҺҗ835.
van der Heijden, P. G. M., and J. de Leeuw. 1985. Correspondence analysis: A complement to log-linear analysis. Psychometrika 50: 429бҺҗ447.
van der Heijden, P. G. M., A. de Falguerolles, and J. de Leeuw. 1989. A combined approach to contingency table analysis using correspondence analysis and log-linear analysis. Appl. Statist. 38: 249бҺҗ292.
Verbeke, G., and E. Lesaffre. 1996. A linear mixed-effects model with heterogeneity in the random-effects population. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 91: 217бҺҗ221.
Verbeke, G., and G. Molenberghs. 2000. Linear Mixed Models for Longitudinal Data. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Wald, A. 1943. Tests of statistical hypotheses concerning several parameters when the number of observations is large. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 54: 426бҺҗ482.
Walker, S. H., and D. B. Duncan. 1967. Estimation of the probability of an event as a function of several independent variables. Biometrika 54: 167бҺҗ179.
Walley, P. 1996. Inferences from multinomial data: Learning about a bag of marbles. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 58: 3бҺҗ34.
Wardrop, R. L. 1995. SimpsonвҖҷs paradox and the hot hand in basketball. Amer. Statist. 49: 24бҺҗ28.
Ware, J. H., S. Lipsitz, and F. E. Speizer. 1988. Issues in the analysis of repeated categorical outcomes. Statist. Medic. 7: 95бҺҗ107.
Watson, G. S. 1956. Missing and вҖҳвҖҳmixed upвҖҷвҖҷ frequencies in contingency tables. Biometrics 12: 47бҺҗ50.
Watson, G. S. 1959. Some recent results in chi-square goodness-of-fit tests. Biometrics 15: 440бҺҗ468.

REFERENCES

687

Wedderburn, R. W. M. 1974. Quasi-likelihood functions, generalized linear models, and the GaussбҺҗNewton method. Biometrika 61: 439бҺҗ447.
Wedderburn, R. W. M. 1976. On the existence and uniqueness of the maximum likelihood estimates for certain generalized linear models. Biometrika 63: 27бҺҗ32.
Wermuth, N. 1976. Model search among multiplicative models. Biometrics 32: 253бҺҗ263.
Wermuth, N. 1987. Parametric collapsibility and the lack of moderating effects in contingency tables with a dichotomous response variable. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 49: 353бҺҗ364.
Westfall, P. H., and R. D. Wolfinger. 1997. Multiple tests with discrete distributions. Amer. Statist. 51: 3бҺҗ8.
Westfall, P. H., and S. S. Young. 1993. Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for p-Value Adjustment. New York: Wiley.
White, H. 1982. Maximum likelihood estimation of misspecified models. Econometrica 50: 1бҺҗ26.
White, A. A., J. R. Landis, and M. M. Cooper. 1982. A note on the equivalence of several marginal homogeneity test criteria for categorical data. Internat. Statist. ReВ®. 50: 27бҺҗ34.
Whitehead, J. 1993. Sample size calculations for ordered categorical data. Statist. Medic. 12: 2257бҺҗ2271.
Whittaker, J. 1990. Graphical Models in Applied MultiВ®ariate Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Whittaker, J., and M. Aitkin. 1978. A flexible strategy for fitting complex log-linear models. Biometrics 34: 487бҺҗ495.
Whittemore, A. S. 1978. Collapsibility of multidimensional tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 40: 328бҺҗ340.
Whittemore, A. S. 1981. Sample size for logistic regression with small response probability. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 76: 27бҺҗ32.
Wilks, S. S. 1935. The likelihood test of independence in contingency tables. Ann. Math. Statist. 6: 190бҺҗ196.
Wilks, S. S. 1938. The large-sample distribution of the likelihood ratio for testing composite hypotheses. Ann. Math. Statist. 9: 60бҺҗ62.
Williams, D. A. 1975. The analysis of binary responses from toxicological experiments involving reproduction and teratogenicity. Biometrics 31: 949бҺҗ952.
Williams, D. A. 1982. Extra-binomial variation in logistic linear models. Appl. Statist. 31: 144бҺҗ148.
Williams, D. A. 1987. Generalized linear model diagnostics using the deviance and single-case deletions. Appl. Statist. 36: 181бҺҗ191.
Williams, D. A. 1988. Comments on вҖҳвҖҳThe impact of litter effects on doseбҺҗresponse modeling in teratology.вҖҷвҖҷ Biometrics 44: 305бҺҗ308.
Williams, E. J. 1952. Use of scores for the analysis of association in contingency tables. Biometrika 39: 274бҺҗ289.
Williams, O. D., and J. E. Grizzle. 1972. Analysis for contingency tables having ordered response categories. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 67: 55бҺҗ63.
Wilson, E. B. 1927. Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical inference. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 22: 209бҺҗ212.
Wolfinger, R., and M. OвҖҷConnell. 1993. Generalized linear mixed models: A pseudo-likelihood approach. J. Statist. Comput. Simul. 48: 233бҺҗ243.
Wong, G. Y., and W. M. Mason. 1985. The hierarchical logistic regression model for multilevel analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 80: 513бҺҗ524.
Woolf, B. 1955. On estimating the relation between blood group and disease. Ann. Human Genet. ЕҪ London. 19: 251бҺҗ253.
Woolson, R. F., and W. R. Clarke. 1984. Analysis of categorical incomplete longitudinal data. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 147: 87бҺҗ99.

688

REFERENCES

Wu, C. F. J. 1985. Efficient sequential designs with binary data. J. Amer. Statist. Soc. 80: 974бҺҗ984.
Yang, I., and M. P. Becker. 1997. Latent variable modeling of diagnostic accuracy. Biometrics 53: 948бҺҗ958.
Yates, F. 1934. Contingency tables involving small numbers and the вҗ№ 2 test. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Suppl. 1: 217бҺҗ235.
Yates, F. 1948. The analysis of contingency tables with grouping based on quantitative characters. Biometrika 35: 176бҺҗ181.
Yates, F. 1984. Tests of significance for 2 = 2 contingency tables. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. A 147: 426бҺҗ463.
Yee, T. W., and C. J. Wild. 1996. Vector generalized additive models. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 58: 481бҺҗ493.
Yerushalmy, J. 1947. Statistical problems in assessing methods of medical diagnosis, with special reference to x-ray techniques. Public Health Rep. 62: 1432бҺҗ1449.
Yule, G. U. 1900. On the association of attributes in statistics. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A 194: 257бҺҗ319.
Yule, G. U. 1903. Notes on the theory of association of attributes in statistics. Biometrika 2: 121бҺҗ134.
Yule, G. U. 1906. On a property which holds good for all groupings of a normal distribution of frequency for two variables, with application to the study of contingency tables for the inheritance of unmeasured qualities. Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser A 77: 324бҺҗ336.
Yule, G. U. 1912. On the methods of measuring association between two attributes. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 75: 579бҺҗ642.
Zeger, S. L., and M. R. Karim. 1991. Generalized linear models with random effects: A Gibbs sampling approach. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 86: 79бҺҗ86
Zeger, S. L., K.-Y. Liang, and P. S. Albert. 1988. Models for longitudinal data: A generalized estimating equation approach. Biometrics 44: 1049бҺҗ1060.
Zelen, M. 1971. The analysis of several 2 = 2 contingency tables. Biometrika 58: 129бҺҗ137. Zelen, M. 1991. Multinomial response models. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 12: 249бҺҗ254.
Zellner, A., and P. E. Rossi. 1984. Bayesian analysis of dichotomous quantal response models. J. Economet. 25: 365бҺҗ393.
Zelterman. D. 1987. Goodness-of-fit tests for large sparse multinomial distributions. J. Amer. Statist. Soc. 82: 624бҺҗ629.
Zermelo, E. 1929. Die Berechnung der Turnier-Ergebnisse als ein Maximumproblem der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Math. Z. 29: 436бҺҗ460.
Zhang, H., J. Crowley, H. Sox, and R. Olshen. 1998. Tree-structured statistical methods. Pp. 4561бҺҗ4573 in Encyclopedia of Biostatistics. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Zheng, B., and A. Agresti. 2000. Summarizing the predictive power of a generalized linear model. Statist. Medic. 19: 1771бҺҗ1781.
Zhu, Y., and N. Reid. 1994. Information, ancillarity, and sufficiency in the presence of nuisance parameters. Canad. J. Statist. 22: 111бҺҗ123.

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7

Examples Index

Abortion and education, 345 Abortion opinions, 29, 205бҺҗ206, 441, 486,
504бҺҗ506, 553 Admissions into Berkeley, 62бҺҗ63 Admissions into Florida, 223бҺҗ224, 529 Afterlife, belief in, 302бҺҗ303 AIDS and AZT use, 184бҺҗ187 AIDS, measures to deal with, 347 Air pollution and breathing, 377бҺҗ378 Alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana use,
322бҺҗ326, 361бҺҗ363, 367, 482бҺҗ483, 528 Alcohol consumption and malformation,
89бҺҗ90, 158, 179бҺҗ180, 182 Alcohol and driving, 203 Alligator food choice, 268бҺҗ274, 304 AlzheimerвҖҷs disease and cognitive impairment,
310 Aspirations by income, 107, Aspirin and heart attacks, 37, 46, 71бҺҗ72 Automobile collisions and seat belts, 40бҺҗ41,
61, 305бҺҗ306, 327бҺҗ329, 331, 349, 361
Baseball complete games, 157бҺҗ158 Baseball standings, 437бҺҗ438 Beetle mortality, 247бҺҗ250 Birth control, teenage, 352 Blood pressure and heart disease, 221бҺҗ223 Breast cancer, 38, 105, 107 Breathing test and smoking, 307, 377бҺҗ378 Breathlessness, wheeze, and age, 378 Buchanan vote in Palm Beach County,
156бҺҗ157 Busing and race, 348
Calves and pneumonia, 25бҺҗ26, 34 Cancer of larynx and radiation therapy, 107 Cancer remission, 197бҺҗ199, 261 CaptureбҺҗrecapture, hepatitis, 533

CaptureбҺҗrecapture of snowshoe hares, 511бҺҗ513, 544бҺҗ545, 551бҺҗ552
Carcinoma of uterine cervix, 431бҺҗ435, 532, 541бҺҗ544, 549бҺҗ551
Chlorophyll inheritance, 29 Cholesterol and cereal, 309 Claritin, 109 Clinical trials, 230бҺҗ236, 507бҺҗ510 Coffee drinking, 446 Cola drink taste test, 448 Condoms and adolescents, 202 Coronary deaths and smoking, 404 Credit card and income ЕҪItaly., 206 Crime and race, 63 Crossover drug trial, 457, 483бҺҗ484
Death penalty and race, 48бҺҗ52, 63, 65, 201 Depression, mental, 459бҺҗ461, 468бҺҗ469,
506бҺҗ507 Developmental toxicity study, 290бҺҗ291,
517бҺҗ521 Diabetes, case-control study, 418бҺҗ419 Diagnostic tests, 60, 66 Diarrhea, 255 Draft position in sports, 207 Dumping severity, 308бҺҗ309 Dysmenorrhea, 483бҺҗ484, 572
Esophageal cancer, 203
Fish egg hatching, 568бҺҗ569 Free throws, 105, 160бҺҗ161
GamblerвҖҷs ruin, 489бҺҗ490 Genetics, 165 Government spending, 349бҺҗ351, 449, 530бҺҗ531 Graduate admissions at Florida, 223бҺҗ224, 529 Graduate admissions at Berkeley, 62бҺҗ63

689

690

EXAMPLES INDEX

Graham Greene, 28 Gun-related deaths, 61
Heart attacks and aspirin use, 37, 46 Heart catheterization and race, 62 Heart disease and blood pressure, 221бҺҗ223 Heart disease and snoring, 121бҺҗ123 Heart valve replacement and survival, 385бҺҗ387 Hepatitis outbreaks, 533 Home team advantage in baseball, 437бҺҗ438 Homicide victims, number, 561бҺҗ563, 564бҺҗ565,
571 Horseshoe crab mating, 126бҺҗ131, 154бҺҗ155,
159, 168бҺҗ170, 173бҺҗ176, 188бҺҗ192, 212бҺҗ216, 570
Income by year, 308 Infant survival, gestation, smoking, and age,
400бҺҗ401 Insomnia, 462бҺҗ464, 469, 487, 514бҺҗ515, 531
Job satisfaction and income, 57бҺҗ59, 87бҺҗ88, 287бҺҗ288, 295, 297, 308
Job satisfaction and race, gender, age, and location, 205
Journal citations, 448
Kyphosis and spinal surgery, 199бҺҗ200
Labelling index and remission, 197бҺҗ199, 261 Larry Bird free throws, 105 Leading crowd, 516бҺҗ517, 532 Leprosy, 239 Life table, 284 Lung cancer and chemotherapy, 306, Lung cancer and smoking, 42, 61, 62, 64 Lung cancer survival, 390бҺҗ391
Malformation of infants, 89бҺҗ90, 158, 179бҺҗ180, 182
MendelвҖҷs theories, 22бҺҗ23 Mental health, and parents SES, 381, 383бҺҗ384 Mental impairment, life events and SES,
279бҺҗ282 Migration, 423, 427бҺҗ428 Missing people in London, 202 Mixture for two protozoan genuses, 546 Motor vehicle accident rates, 403 Movie reviewers, 445бҺҗ446 Multicenter clinical trial, infection cream,
230бҺҗ235, 508бҺҗ510 Multicenter clinical trial, fungal infections,
394бҺҗ395, 530

Multiple sclerosis and neurologist ratings, 447 Murder rates in U.S., 62, 63 Myocardial infarction and aspirin, 37, 46,
71бҺҗ72 Myocardial infarction and diabetes, 418бҺҗ419
NCAA graduation rates, 202 Nervousness and Claritin, 109
Obesity, occasion and gender, 487 Occupational aspirations, 206 Occupational status, father and son, 447 Oral contraceptive use, 200 Osteosarcoma, 262бҺҗ263
Palm Beach County vote for Buchanan, 156бҺҗ157
Party identification by race and by gender, 105бҺҗ106, 303
Party identification and protestors, 307 Pathologists ratings of carcinoma, 431бҺҗ435,
532, 541бҺҗ544, 549бҺҗ551 Penicillin and rabbits, 259бҺҗ260 Pig farmer survey, 484бҺҗ485 Pneumonia infections, 25бҺҗ26, 34 Poison dose for protozoa, 546бҺҗ547 Political ideology and party affiliation, 305,
375бҺҗ377 Pregnancy rates, 567 Presidential approval rating, 409бҺҗ412 Presidential vote, by state, 503бҺҗ504, 534 Promotion discrimination, 254бҺҗ255 Prussian army and mule kicks, 30 Psychiatric patients and prescribed drugs,
106бҺҗ107
Religious fundamentalism and education, 80, 81бҺҗ82
Religious services, frequency of attendance, 352
Respiratory illness, age and maternal smoking, 480бҺҗ481
Respiratory illness in children, 478бҺҗ479
Satisfaction with housing, 310 Satisfaction with job, 205 Schizophrenia origin, 83бҺҗ84 Seat belts and injury, 40бҺҗ41, 61, 305бҺҗ306,
327бҺҗ329, 331, 349, 361 Sex, frequency of, 569бҺҗ570 Sex opinions, 65, 217бҺҗ219, 368, 371бҺҗ373, 421,
430, 431, 530 Sexual intercourse, gender and race, 201

EXAMPLES INDEX

691

Shopping choice, 300 Snowshoe hares, 511бҺҗ513, 544бҺҗ545, 551бҺҗ552 Soccer and arrests, 403 Sore throat in surgery, 204 Space shuttle, 199 Student survey ЕҪalcohol, marijuana, cigarettes.,
322бҺҗ326, 361бҺҗ363, 367, 482бҺҗ483, 528
Tea drinker, 92, 100 Teenage birth control, 368, 371бҺҗ373 Tennis rankings, 449

Teratology studies, 151бҺҗ153 Titanic, 61 Toxicity study, 517бҺҗ520 Train accidents, 403, 569
UFOs, 106
Vegetarianism, 16бҺҗ17, 29 Veterinary information sources, 484бҺҗ485 Voting, proportion by state, 503бҺҗ504, 534

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7

Author Index

Adelbasit, K. M., 196 Agresti, A., 27, 32, 33, 60, 100, 101, 102, 104,
111, 156, 227, 255, 258, 266, 298, 301, 379, 384, 397, 399, 422, 426, 435, 443, 445, 453, 465, 481, 485, 491, 502, 511, 513, 517, 518, 526, 527, 533, 536, 551, 552, 565, 567, 596, 630, 651 Aitchison, J., 265, 301, 465, 561, 613, 625 Aitken, C. G. G., 613 Aitkin M., 155, 388, 398, 399, 495, 520, 526, 545, 565, 633 Albert, A., 195, 197 Albert, J. H., 607, 609 Albert, P. S., 688 Allison, P. D., 633, 643 Altham, P. M. E., xv, 59, 103, 104, 240, 442, 443, 555, 566, 573, 587, 608 Amemiya, T., 227, 258, 300 Andersen, E. B., 255, 399, 450, 496, 526, 576, 631 Anderson, C. J., 398, 399 Anderson, D. A., 520, 526 Anderson, D. R., 216 Anderson, J. A., 171, 195, 196, 197, 207, 277 Anderson, R. L., 631 Anderson, T. W., 478, 482, 490 Aranda-Ordaz, F. J., 250, 399 Arminger, G., 549 Armitage, P., 104, 181 Ashford, J. R., 258, 379 Asmussen, S., 360 Azzalini, A., 480
Baglivo, J., 346 Baker, R. J., 283 Baker, S. G., 393, 482, 541 Banerjee, C., 443 Baptista, J., 100 Barnard, G. A., 95, 104, 114 Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E., 266 Bartholomew, D. J., 526, 565

Bartlett, M. S., 265, 623бҺҗ624, 631

Becker, M., 370, 399, 435, 443, 544, 644

Bedrick, E. J., 77, 103

Begg, C. B., 273

Beitler, P. J., 508

Benedetti, J. K., 102, 398

Benichou, J., 66

BenzВҙecri, J. P., 399, 624

Berger, R., 18, 33, 95, 594

Bergsma, W. P., 481

Berkson, J., 80, 104, 166, 197, 612, 624, 631

Berry, G., 104

Berry, S. M., 207

Best, D. J., 103

Bhapkar, V. P., 27, 103, 104, 291, 422, 453,

488, 612, 615, 616, 629

Bickel, P., 63

Biggeri, A., 566

Billingsley, P., 482

Birch, M. W., 255, 263, 295, 298, 336, 339, 340,

341, 346, 369, 392, 576, 585, 627, 631

Bishop, Y. M. M., 347, 360, 366, 452, 482, 526,

576, 582, 587, 591, 594, 627, 629, 631

Blaker, H., 20, 27, 93, 635

Bliss, C., 246, 247, 560, 623

Blyth, C. R., 20, 27, 32, 59

Bock, R. D., 300, 301, 495, 526, 624, 625

BВЁockenholt, U., 398, 399, 443

Bonney, G. E., 479, 480

Boos, D. D., 95, 467, 481

Booth, J., xv, 104, 223, 397, 443, 523, 525, 567,

630

Bowker, A. H., 424

Box, J. F., 23, 92, 623, 624

Bradley, R. A., 302, 436, 443

Breslow, N., 51, 59, 155, 156, 171, 234, 235,

255, 258, 399, 419, 493, 523, 524, 563, 625,

631

Brier, S. S., 515

Brooks, S. P., 566

Bross, I. D. J., 111

693

694

AUTHOR INDEX

Brown, L. D., 15, 27, 33, 606 Brown, M. B., 102, 398 Brown, P. J., 613, 614 Brownstone, D., 302, 527 Bull, S. B., 196 Burnham, K. P., 216, 526, 552 Burridge, J., 283 Butler, R., 104, 397, 443, 630 Byar, D. P., 232, 295, 414, 481, 625
Caffo, B., xv, 102, 656 Cameron, A. C., 131, 155, 561, 566, 574 Carey, V., 474 Carroll, R. J., 171, 467 Casella, G., 18, 33, 594 Catalano, P. J., 527 Caussinus, H., 425, 427, 428, 443, 451, 627, 631 Chaloner, K., 196, 609 Chamberlain, G., 419, 420, 526 Chambers, E. A., 258 Chambers, J. M., 633 Chambers, R. L., 527 Chan, I., 104 Chan, J. S. K., 523 Chao, A., 513, 526, 533 Chapman, D. G., 258 Chen, Z., 527, 643, 651 Chib, S., 609 Christensen, R., 196 Chuang, C., 399, 462 Clayton D. G., 388, 399, 493, 523, 563, 625,
631 Clogg, C. C., 103, 391, 399, 565, 627 Clopper, C. J., 18 Cochran W. G., 27, 80, 88, 163, 181, 232, 239,
396, 459, 488, 596, 626, 627, 631 Coe, P. R., 101 Cohen, A., 103, 104 Cohen, J., 434, 435, 443 Coleman, J. S., 516, 532 Collett, D., 196, 204 Conaway, M. R., 426, 482, 526, 565 Cook, R. D., 225 Copas, J. B., 156, 257, 442, 616 Corcoran, C., 197, 573 Cormack, R. M., 511, 526, 551 Cornfield, J., 42, 47, 51, 71, 77, 99, 100, 171,
196, 208, 221, 624 Coull, B. A., xv, 27, 32, 33, 513, 518, 526, 533,
552, 567, 655, 662 Cox, C., 266, 282, 286, 576, 587, 641 Cox, D. R., 12, 104, 133, 138, 196, 197, 258,
415, 482, 493, 497, 624, 625, 631
CramВҙer, H., 112, 576, 587, 625бҺҗ626

Cressie, N., 27, 112, 258, 396, 612 Croon, M., 481 Crouchley, R., 527 Crowder, M. J., 555, 566
DвҖҷAgostino, R. B., Jr., 196 Dalal, S. R., 199 Daniels, M. J., 524, 609 Dardanoni, V., 301 Darroch, J. N., 347, 357, 398, 414, 426, 443,
459, 481, 513, 526, 551, 552, 565, 626, 629, 631 Das Gupta, S., 237 David, H. A., 443 Davis, L. J., 59, 93, 398 Davison, A. C., 156, 594 Dawson, R. B., Jr., 103 Dawson, R. J. M., 61 Day, N. E., 51, 171, 232, 235, 258, 399, 625 de Falguerolles, A., 399, 664, 686 de Leeuw, J., 399
DemВҙetrio, C. G. B., 156, 555, 566
Deming, W. E., 343, 347, 511 Dempster, A. P., 522 Dey, D. K., 609 Diaconis, P., 103, 104 Diggle, P., 471, 625 Dillon, W., 443 Dittrich, R., xv, 443 Dobson, A. J., 155 Doll, R., 42, 62, 64, 404 Dong, J., xv, 59, 614, 616 Donner, A., 172, 196, 258 Doolittle, M. H., 621 Downing, D., 103 Drost, F. C., 112, 258, 595 Ducharme, G. R., 398 Duncan, D. B., 195, 197, 277, 301, 624 Dupont, W. D., 93 Dyke, G. V., 624
Edwardes, M. D., 301 Edwards, A. W. F., 59 Edwards, D., 360, 398 Efron, B., 103, 146, 196, 227, 258, 526, 605,
610 Ekholm, A., 156, 481 Eliason, S. R., 103, 391 Escoufier, Y., 383, 399 Espeland, M. A., 544, 571 Everitt, B. S., 633
Fahrmeir, L., 155, 300, 615 Farewell, V. T., 171, 301, 527, 625

AUTHOR INDEX

695

Fay, R., 103, 482, 594 Fechner, G., 623 Ferguson, T. S., 605, 617 Fienberg, S. E., 344, 347, 392, 438, 443, 513,
526, 610, 615, 616, 626, 627, 629, 631 Finney, D., 151, 258, 556, 623 Firth, D., 155, 156, 196, 330, 467, 481, 482 Fischer, G. H., 526 Fisher, R. A., 12, 22, 23, 29, 51, 79, 91, 92, 95,
99, 104, 114, 146, 156, 162, 237, 247, 560, 576, 589, 622бҺҗ624, 625, 626, 628, 631 Fitzmaurice, G. M., 103, 466, 474, 481, 482, 649 Fitzpatrick, S., 35 Fleiss, J. L., 104, 110, 111, 242, 258, 347, 435, 436, 443 Follman, D. A., 546, 547, 548, 566 Forcina, A., 301 Forster, J. J., 104, 346, 397, 482, 616, 630 Forthofer, R. N., 378 Fowlkes, E. B., 199, 226, 257 Francom, S., 462 Freedman, D., 23, 63 Freeman, D. H. Jr., 399 Freeman, G. H., 97 Freeman, M. F., 112 Freidlin, B., 104 Friendly, M., 59, 399, 633 Frome, E. L., 155, 399 Fuchs, C., 482
Gabriel, K. R., 263, 399 Gaddum, J. H., 623 Gail, M. H., 104, 625 Gart, J. J., 70, 71, 77, 102, 104, 197, 255, 258,
397, 442 Gaskins, R. A., 614 Gastwirth, J., 104, 197 Gatsonis, C., xv, 230, 481, 524, 609 Gelfand, A. E., 609 Genter, F. C., 301 Geyer, C., 678 Ghosh, B. K., 27 Ghosh, M., 442, 609 Gibbons, R. D., 520 Gilbert, G. N., 217 Gill, J., 155 Gilmour, A. R., 526 Gilula, Z., 83, 382, 384 Gini, C., 329 Glass, P. V., 447 Gleser, L. J., 103 Glonek, G. F. V., 393, 466 Godambe, V. P., 104, 482

Goetghebeur, E., 482 Gokhale, D. V., 112, 612, 616 Goldstein, H., 520, 524 Good, I. J., 24, 60, 104, 605, 607, 608, 612, 614,
616, 626, 630 Goodman L. A., 35, 59, 68, 69, 83, 84, 102,
110, 213, 217, 228, 340, 346, 365, 366, 369, 370, 374, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 397, 398, 399, 406, 407, 408, 425, 428, 431, 443, 478, 482, 490, 516, 527, 540, 565, 566, 572, 621, 622, 627, 628, 629, 631 Gould, S. J., 544 Gourieroux, C., 467, 482 Graubard, B. I., 89, 103 Gray, R., 273 Green, P. J., 156 Greenacre, M. J., 384, 399 Greene, G., 28 Greenland, S., 96, 234, 258 Greenwood, M., 566 Greenwood, P. E., 27 Grego, J., 686 Grizzle, J. E., 291, 301, 457, 601, 615, 624, 629, 631 Gross, S. T., 197 Grove, W. M., 544 Gueorguieva, R., xv, 527, 670 Gupta, A. K., 607
Haber, M., 95, 96, 103, 291, 465 Haberman, S. J., 69, 81, 83, 113, 195, 224, 258,
268, 300, 349, 346, 347, 364, 367, 369, 374, 380, 382, 392, 393, 396, 399, 408, 440, 526, 540, 565, 572, 576, 589, 591, 592, 595, 627, 629, 631 Hagenaars, J., 565 Hald, A., 623 Haldane, J. B. S., 70, 103, 196 Hall, P., 616 Halton, J. H., 97 Hamada, M., 301 Handelman, S. L., 544, 571 Hanfelt, J., 566, 571 Hansen, L. P., 467, 482 Harkness, W. L., 258 Harrell, F. E., 229, 282, 301 Hartzel, J., 511, 513, 514, 516, 534, 651 Haslett, S., 394 Hastie, T., 153, 199, 301, 633 Hatzinger, R., 565 Hauck, W. W., 172, 234, 258 Haynam, G. F., 243 Heagerty, P., 481, 527, 548 Hedeker, D., 520, 653

696
Heinen, T., 565 Hennevogl, W., 513 Henry, N. W., 565 Heyde, C. C., 156, 481 Hill, A. B., 42, 64, 111, 404 Hinde, J., 155, 156, 555, 563, 566 Hinkley, D., 12, 104, 133, 138, 146, 156, 594 Hirji, K. F., 104, 258, 625 Hirotsu, C., 406 Hirschfeld, H., 399 Hoadley, B., 199 Hobert, J., xv, 523, 525, 630 Hodges, J. L., 197 Hoem, J. M., 347, 399 Holford, T. R., 389, 390, 399 Holland, P. W., 610, 615, 629, 631 Hollander, M., 443 Holt, D., 103
HoltbrВЁugge, 306
Hook, E. B., 526 Hosmer, D. W., 177, 196, 197, 257, 258 Hout, M., 65, 428, 443 Howard, J. V., 104, 608 Hsieh, F. Y., 242, 243 Hsu, J. S. J., 608 Hwang, J. T. G., 104
Imrey, P. B., 346, 443, 615 Ireland, C. T., 616 Irwin, J., 91
Jennison, C., 103 Jewell, N. P., 467, 496, 566 Johnson, B. M., 605 Johnson, N. L., 566, 574 Johnson, W., 257 Jones, B., 442, 484, 536 Jones, M. P., 258
JoЦҖ rgensen, B., 136, 155, 156, 266, 470
Kalbfleisch, J. D., 482 Karim, M. R., 524, 609 Kastenbaum, M. A., 627 Kastner, C., 466, 649 Katzenbeisser, W., xv, 672 Kauerman, G., 156, 467 Kelderman, H., 565 Kempthorne, O., 96, 104 Kendall M. G., 27, 56, 60, 68, 399, 631 Kenward, M. G., 442, 475, 484, 536 Khamis, H. J., xv, 332, 443 Kim, D., 104, 255, 298, 379, 397 King, G., 527 Knott, M., 565

AUTHOR INDEX
Knuiman, M. W., 616 Koch, G. G., 27, 302, 436, 447, 459, 460, 481,
532, 601, 615, 616, 629, 631, 670, 673, 674, 675 Koehler, K., 27, 103, 396, 397 Koopman, P. A. R., 77 Korn, E. L., 89, 103 Kraemer, H. C., 443 Kreiner, S., xv, 358, 398 Kruskal, W. H., 59, 60, 68, 69, 102, 110, 621, 631 Ku, H. H., 616 Kuha, J., 330, 347 Kuk, A. Y. C., 523 Kullback, S., 112, 399, 612, 616 Kuo, L., 527, 643, 651 Kupper, L. L., 566
LВЁaВЁarВЁa, F., 301, 313
Lachin, J., 258 Laird, N. M., 385, 386, 389, 466, 482, 522, 541,
609, 610, 649 Lambert, D., 546, 547, 548, 566 Lancaster, H., 20, 27, 83, 84, 113, 399, 626 Landis, J. R., 111, 295, 297, 301, 302, 436, 447,
462, 508, 532 Landrum, M., 609 Landwehr, J. M., 226, 257 Lang, J. B., xv, 301, 340, 399, 465, 481, 537,
541, 551, 643, 644, 649, 655, 675, 678 Laplace, P. S., 15 Larntz, K., 196, 396, 397, 438, 443, 609 Larsen, K., 498 Larson, M. G., 399 Lauritzen, S. L., 346, 398, 399 LaVange, L. M., 103, 197, 481 Lawal, H. B., 396 Lawless, J. F., 155, 482, 560, 561, 566 Lazarsfeld, P. F., 565 Lee, E., 198 Lee, S. K., 596 Lee, Y., 559, 566, 574 Lefkopoulou, M., 566 Lehmann, E., 67, 104, 263, 406 Lehnen, R. G., 378 Lemeshow, S., 177, 196, 197, 257, 258 Leonard, T., 608, 609 Lesaffre, E., 258, 300, 466, 522, 545 Lesperance, M. L., 526, 548 Liang, K.-Y., 104, 258, 442, 467, 469, 471, 473,
481, 482, 525, 556, 566, 571, 573, 625, 631 Lin, X., 524, 525 Lindley, D. V., 609, 630 Lindsay, B., 494, 545, 549

AUTHOR INDEX

697

Lindsey, J. K., 400, 467, 566, 573 Lipsitz, S., 103, 291, 422, 456, 469, 473, 474,
481, 645 Little, R. J., 114, 346, 347, 475, 476, 482 Liu, I., xv, 485, 655, 671 Liu, Q., 510, 522 Lloyd, C., 93, 104, 156, 615 Localio, A. R., 526 Longford, N. T., 520 Loughin, T., 484 Louis, T., 541 Luce, R., 299, 302, 443
Madansky, A., 422, 456 Maddala, G. S., 258, 264, 302 Magidson, J., 653 Magnus, J. R., 602 Mansmann, U., 104 Mantel, N., 87, 93, 104, 171, 197, 209, 230, 231,
232, 234, 238, 260, 295, 296, 297, 300, 379, 414, 481, 612, 618, 624, 625, 627, 631 Martin Andres, A., 104 Mason, W. M., 524, 609 Matthews, J. N. S., 301, 313, 443 Maxwell, A. E., 631 McArdle, J. J., 202 McCloud, P. I., 443 McCullagh, P., 132, 155, 156, 257, 276, 277, 283, 286, 290, 301, 308, 312, 340, 378, 397, 431, 443, 466, 471, 481, 556, 566, 625, 631 McCulloch, C. E., 522, 523, 524, 527, 548, 555, 623, 625 McDonald, J. W., 667, 684 McFadden, D., 228, 264, 299, 300, 302, 302, 624, 631 McNemar, Q., 411 Mee, R. W., 77 Meeden, G., 605 Mehta, C. R., 98, 104, 254, 255, 258, 298, 397, 625, 630 Mendel, G., 22 Mendenhall, W. M., 107 Mersch, G., 400 Michailidis, G., 399 Miettinen, O. S., 77, 442 Miller, M. E., 481, 604 Min, Y., 100, 101 Minkin, S., 196 Mirkin, B., 112 Mitra, S. K., 79, 258, 346, 591, 627, 631 Mittal, Y., 60 Molenaar, I. W., 526 Molenberghs, G., 258, 466, 482 Moore, D. F., 152, 556, 566

Moore, D. S., 27, 103 Morabia, A., 527 Morgan, B. J. T., 196, 207 Morgan, W. M., 346 Morris, C., 526, 605, 610 Mosimann, J. E., 566 Mosteller, F., 345, 412, 443, 627, 629, 631
Nair, V. N., 103, 301 Nam, J., 77 Natarajan, R., xv, 481, 502, 524 Nelder, J., 116, 132, 148, 149, 155, 156, 257,
290, 301, 312, 340, 378, 559, 566, 574, 625, 631 Nerlove, M., 300, 624 Neudecker, H., 602 Neuhaus, J. M., 417, 494, 496, 499, 502, 526, 547, 548, 566 Newcombe, R., 27, 109, 110 Neyman, J., 18, 112, 611, 612, 616, 626, 631 Nikulin, M. S., 27 Normand, S.-L., 609 Norusis, M. J., 633 Nurminen, M., 77
OвҖҷBrien, P. C., 207 OвҖҷBrien, R. G., 244, 258, 640 Ochi, Y., 258 Odoroff, C., 661 OвҖҷGorman, T. W., 596 Olivier, D., 385, 386, 389 Overton, W. S., 526, 552
Pagano M., 61, 657 Paik, M., 59 Palmgren, J., 156, 340 Park, T., 482 Parr, W. C., 594 Parzen, E., 34 Patefield, W. M., 104 Patel, N. R., 98, 258, 625, 630 Patnaik, P. B., 258 Paul, S. R., 566 Pearson, E. S., 18, 104, 626, 631 Pearson, K., 22, 79, 112, 399, 576, 589, 620,
621, 622, 628, 631 Peduzzi, P., 212 Pendergast, J. F., xv, 502 Pepe, M. S., 258 Perlman, M., 237 Peters, D., 104, 630 Peterson, B., 282, 301 Peto, R., 62 Piccarreta, R., 206

698

AUTHOR INDEX

Pierce, D. A., 104, 143, 156, 497, 502, 522, 526, 630
Pike, M. C., 100 Piegorsch, W. W., 684 Plackett, R. L., 103, 196, 399, 623, 627, 631 Podgor, M. J., 197 Poisson, S.-D., 7 Pratt, J. W., 283 Pregibon, D., 143, 156, 197, 225, 257, 258, 566,
638 Prentice, R. L., 171, 196, 258, 283, 399, 482,
555, 566, 625 Presnell, B., 156 Press, S. J., 196, 300, 624 Pyke, R., 171, 625
Qaqish, B., 676 Qu, A., 482 Quetelet, A., 68 Quine, M. P., 29
Rabe-Hesketh, S., 527, 633 Radelet, M., 48, 65 Raftery, A., 257 Rao, C. R., 10, 12, 576, 582, 585, 587, 589, 591,
596, 616, 626, 631 Rao, J. N. K., 103, 515 Rasbash, J., 520, 524 Rasch, G., 399, 415, 493, 495, 624 Rayner, J. C. W., 103 Read, T. R. C., 27, 112, 258, 396, 612 Regal, R. R., 526 Reid, N., 96 Rice, W. R., 104 Ripley, B., 633 Ritov, Y., 384 Robins, J., 234, 258, 475
RВЁohmel, J., 104
Rosenbaum, P. R., 196 Rosner, B., 566 Rossi, P. E., 609 Rotnitzky, A., 467 Routledge, R. D., 104, 607 Roy, S. N., 79, 346, 627, 631 Rubin, D., 196, 475, 482 Rudas, T., 481, 565 Rundell, P. W. K., 613, 614 Ryan, L., 290, 527, 566
Sackrowitz, H. B., 103, 104 Samuels, M. L., 60 Santner, T. J., 101 Schafer, D. W., 143, 156 Schafer, J. L., 103, 347, 482

Schluchter, M. D., 399 Schumacher, M., 306 Scott, A. J., 35, 103, 197 Searle, S., 527, 555 Seeber, G., 155 Sekar, C. C., 511 Self, S. G., 258, 525 Sen, P. K., 594 Seneta E., 29 Silvey, S. D., 301, 465, 625 Singer, J. M., 594 Shapiro, S. H., 398 Shen, S. M., 265 Shihadeh, E. S., 399 Shuster, J. J., 95, 103, 104, 442 Silva Mato, A., 104 Silvapulle, M. J., 195 Silvey, S. D., 301, 465, 625 Simon, G., 197, 301, 374, 399, 612, 624, 629 Simonoff, J., 594, 614, 615, 616 Simpson, E. H., 51, 60, 398, 596, 621 Singer, J. M., 594 Skellam, J. G., 566 Skene, A. M., 502, 609 Skinner, C., 347 Skrondal, A., 527 Slaton, T. L., 566 Small, K. A., xv, 302 Smith A. F. M., 609, 616 Smith, K. W., 345 Smith, P. W. F., 443, 482, 616 Snell, E. J., 196, 301, 624 Snell, M. K., 101 Sobel, M. E., 672 Somers, R. H., 68 Somes, G. W., 488 Speed, T., 347, 616 Spiegelhalter, D., 616 Spitzer, R. L., 435 Sprott, D. A., 95, 114, 453 Starmer, C. F., 601, 629 Stasinopoulos, M., 526 Stern, S., 302 Sterne, T. E., 20 Stevens, S. S., 26 Stigler, S., 22, 443, 448, 623, 631 Still, H. A., 20, 27, 32 Stiratelli, R., 482, 526 Stokes M. E., xv, 282, 302, 399, 476, 482, 633,
640, 649 Strawderman, R. L., 104, 630 Stuart, A., 27, 56, 399, 422 Stukel, T. A., 196, 250 Sturmfels, B., 104

AUTHOR INDEX

699

Suissa, S., 95, 104, 442 Sundberg, R., 346, 366
Tamhane, A. C., 101 Tango, T., 411 Tanner, M. A., 443 Tarone, R. E., 197, 234, 258
TavarВҙe, S., 103
Ten Have, T. R., xv, 517, 526, 527, 527 Theil, H., 57, 228, 300, 624 Thomas, D. R., 103, 515 Thompson, R., 283 Thompson, W. A., 399 Thurstone, L. L., 443 Tibshirani, R., 153, 199, 301 Titterington, D. M., 616 Tjur, T., 426, 552, 553 Tocher, K. D., 94 Toledano, A., 230, 481 Tolley, H. D., 594 Train, K., 302, 527 Trivedi, P. K., 131, 155, 561, 566, 574 Tsiatis, A. A., 152, 197, 556, 566 Tukey, J., 112 Turing, A., 631 Turnbull, B. W., 103 Tutz, G., 155, 156, 289, 290, 300, 301, 513, 615
Uebersax, J. S., 544 Uttal, D. H., 517
van der Heijden, P. G., 399 Venables, W. N., 633 Verbeke, G., 482, 545 Vermunt, J. K., 399, 653
Wainer, H., 63 Wakefield, J. C., 502, 609 Wald, A., 11, 172 Walker, S. H., 195, 197, 277, 301, 624 Walley, P., 616 Walsh, S. J., 104 Wardrop, R. L., 105 Ware, J. H., 478, 480, 482 Watson, G. S., 79, 103, 576, 590, 627, 631

Wedderburn, R. W. M., 116, 148, 149, 150, 155, 156, 195, 258, 265, 266, 466, 470, 625, 631
Weisberg, S., 226 Wells, M. T., 104, 630 Wermuth, N., 398, 399, 401 Westfall, P. H., 214, 360 White, A. A., 481 White, H., 467, 471, 482 Whitehead, J., 301 Whittaker, J., 346, 358, 398, 399 Whittemore, A. S., 243, 398 Wild, C., 103, 197, 301 Wilks, S. S., 12 Williams, D. A., 156, 225, 397, 555, 566, 653 Williams, E. J., 103, 399 Williams, O. D., 291, 301, 624 Wilson, E. B., 16 Wilson, J., 103 Winner, L., 445 Wolfinger, R. D., 214, 360, 527 Wong, G. Y., 524, 609 Woolf, B., 71 Woolson, R. F., 487, 596 Wu, C. F. J., 196, 301 Wu, M., 346, 347
Yamagami, S., 101 Yang, I., 544 Yang, M., 104 Yates F., 91, 93, 96, 98, 103, 104, 114, 239, 624 Yee, T. W., 301 Yerushalmy, J., 38 Young, S. S., 214, 360 Yule, G. U., 44, 53, 59, 68, 110, 346, 406, 566,
620бҺҗ621, 628, 631
Zeger, S. L., 442, 467, 469, 471, 473, 481, 482, 499, 500, 524, 548, 609, 625, 631
Zelen, M., 255, 625, 631 Zellner, A., 609 Zelterman, D., 397 Zermelo, E., 443 Zhang, H., 257 Zhao, L., 482 Zheng, B., 227, 258, 266 Zhu, Y., 96 Zweiful, J. R., 70, 397

Categorical Data Analysis, Second Edition. Alan Agresti Copyright В¶ 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN: 0-471-36093-7

Subject Index

Adjacent categories logit, 286бҺҗ288, 370бҺҗ371, 374бҺҗ376, 642
Adjusted residual, see Standardized Pearson residual
Agreement, 431бҺҗ436, 443, 453бҺҗ454, 541бҺҗ544, 549бҺҗ551
AIC, 216бҺҗ217, 324 Alternating logistic regressions, 474 Ancillary statistic, 104 Arc sine transformation, 596 Armitage test, see CochranбҺҗArmitage
trend test Association, see Measures of association Association graphs, 357бҺҗ360, 539 Association models, 373бҺҗ381, 399 Asymptotic covariance matrix, 137бҺҗ138,
577бҺҗ581, 594 Asymptotic normality, 73бҺҗ77, 577бҺҗ581 Attributable risk, 66, 110
Backward elimination, 214бҺҗ216 BAN, 611, 626 Baseline-category logits, 267бҺҗ274, 300,
310бҺҗ311, 426, 515, 640бҺҗ643 Bayesian inference, 604бҺҗ610, 616, 630бҺҗ631
binomial parameters, 605бҺҗ607, 617 generalized linear mixed models, 524, 609 kernel smoothing, connection, 614 multinomial proportions, 607бҺҗ610, 618 Bernoulli distribution, 117 Beta-binomial distribution, 30, 553бҺҗ559, 566,
572, 573, 653 Beta distribution, 554, 572, 605бҺҗ606 Bias, 70, 85, 196, 450, 496, 524, 548, 595, 615 BIC, 257 Binary data
correlated, 409бҺҗ420, 455бҺҗ482, 491бҺҗ527, 538бҺҗ559
generalized linear models, 120бҺҗ125, 137, 140 matched pairs, 409бҺҗ420

Binomial distribution, 5бҺҗ6 admissible estimator, 605 confidence interval for proportion, 15бҺҗ17, 32бҺҗ33, 635 exact inference, 18бҺҗ20 exponential family, 117, 134 GLM likelihood equations, 137 likelihood function, 9 matched pairs, 409бҺҗ420 moment generating function, 31 overdispersion, 8, 30 tests for proportion, 14бҺҗ15 variance stabilizing, 596
Binomial models deviance, 140 GLMs, 120бҺҗ125 likelihood equations, 137, 265 overdispersion, 151бҺҗ153, 291, 573, 653
BirchвҖҷs results, 336 Bootstrap, 75, 156, 525, 531, 594 BradleyбҺҗTerry model, 436бҺҗ439, 443, 647 BreslowбҺҗDay test, 258
Calibration, 207 Canonical correlation, 382, 399, 408, 624 Canonical link, 117, 148бҺҗ149, 193, 257, 472,
496 CaptureбҺҗrecapture, 511бҺҗ513, 526, 544бҺҗ545,
551бҺҗ552 CART, 257 Case-control study, 42бҺҗ43, 46бҺҗ47, 59, 233,
and logistic regression, 170бҺҗ171, 418бҺҗ420, 625
several controls per case, 233, 442 Categorical data analysis, 1бҺҗ688 Causal diagram, 217бҺҗ218 Censoring, 386, 400 Centering, 167, 175 Chi-squared distribution
df, 12, 79, 175, 589
701

702

SUBJECT INDEX

Chi-squared distribution ЕҪContinued. mgf, 35 moments, 27 noncentral, 237, 258, 408, 591бҺҗ592, 595, 597 reproductive property, 82 table of percentage points, 654
Chi-squared statistics likelihood-ratio, see Likelihood-ratio statistic partitioning, see Partitioning Pearson, see Pearson chi-squared statistic
Classification methods, 196, 257, 228бҺҗ230, 258 Clinical trials, 42, 230бҺҗ236, 507бҺҗ510 ClopperбҺҗPearson confidence interval, 18бҺҗ20,
33, 606 Cluster sampling, 103, 481, 515 Clustered data, 455, 491бҺҗ527, 556бҺҗ558 Cochran, W. G., 626 CochranбҺҗArmitage trend test, 181бҺҗ182, 197,
237, 253, 640 CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel test, 231бҺҗ234, 639
exact test, 254, 298 and marginal homogeneity, 413, 458бҺҗ459,
481 and McNemar test, 413бҺҗ414 matched pairs, 413 nominal and ordinal cases, 295бҺҗ298, 302,
379, 642бҺҗ643 score test for logit model, 232, 297бҺҗ298 CochranвҖҷs Q, 459, 488 Collapsibility, 358бҺҗ360, 398 Complementary logбҺҗlog model binary response, 248бҺҗ250, 640 ordinal response, 283бҺҗ284, 301, 313, 527,
641 Computer software, see Software Concentration coefficient, 69 Concordance index, 229 Concordant pair, 57бҺҗ59 Conditional distribution, 37, 48 Conditional independence, 52
I = J = K tables, 293бҺҗ298, 302, 318бҺҗ319, 325
logit models, 183бҺҗ184, 230бҺҗ234, 263, 293бҺҗ295, 359бҺҗ360
versus marginal independence, 53, 365бҺҗ366 power and sample size, 244бҺҗ245 small-sample test, 254, 298 Conditional inference, 91бҺҗ101, 250бҺҗ257,
416бҺҗ420, 495бҺҗ496, 630 Conditional logistic regression, 250бҺҗ258,
414бҺҗ420, 495бҺҗ496, 526, 625, 640, 645 Conditional logit, 299 Conditional ML, 100, 417, 494бҺҗ496, 526

Conditional symmetry, 431, 452 Confidence intervals
likelihood-based, 13, 77бҺҗ78 tail method, 18, 99 Wald, 13 score, 15бҺҗ16, 77 Confounding, 47бҺҗ51, 230 Conjugate mixture model, 558бҺҗ559 Constraint equations, 612 Constraints, parameter, 178бҺҗ179, 317, 352бҺҗ353 Contingency coefficient, 112, 620 Contingency table, 36, 47бҺҗ54 Continuation-ratio logit, 289бҺҗ291, 301,
517бҺҗ520 Continuity correction, 27, Continuous proportions, 265бҺҗ266, 624 Contrasts, 82, 317, 340, 344, 603, 636, 639 Correlation, 87, 226, 296, 634 Correlation models, 381бҺҗ384, 399, 408 Correspondence analysis, 382бҺҗ384, 399, 624,
644
CramВҙerвҖҷs V 2, 112
Credit scoring, 165, 263, 631 Cross-classification table, see Contingency
table Crossover study, 444, 457, 483, 498, 501, 572 Cross-product ratio, 44 Cross validation, 266 Cumulant function, 155 Cumulative link models, 282бҺҗ286, 313 Cumulative logit models, 274бҺҗ282, 301, 624,
641 dispersion effects, 285бҺҗ286 marginal models, 420бҺҗ421, 462бҺҗ463, 469 proportional odds property, 275бҺҗ276, 282 random effects, 514бҺҗ515, 536 score test and ranks, 301 Cumulative odds ratio, 67, 276 Cumulative probit model, 278, 283, 301, 312,
624бҺҗ625, 641
Data mining, 219, 631 Decomposable model, 346, 360 Degrees of freedom, 12, 79, 175, 589, 622 Delta method, 73бҺҗ77, 577бҺҗ581, 594 Dependent proportions, 410бҺҗ412 Design, 196, 609 Design matrix, see Model matrix Deviance, 118бҺҗ119, 139бҺҗ142
grouped vs. ungrouped binary data, 208 likelihood-ratio tests, 141бҺҗ142, 186бҺҗ187,
363бҺҗ365 residual, 142, 220, 638 R-squared measures, 228

SUBJECT INDEX

703

Diagnostics, 142бҺҗ143, 219бҺҗ230, 257бҺҗ258, 366бҺҗ367
Diagonals-parameter symmetry, 443 Difference of proportions, 43
collapsibility, 398 dependent, 410бҺҗ412, 645 homogeneity, 258 large-sample confidence interval, 72, 77, 102,
110, 410бҺҗ411 sample size determination, 240бҺҗ242, 258 small-sample confidence interval, 101 z test and Pearson statistic, 111 Directed alternatives, 88бҺҗ90, 236бҺҗ239, 373 Dirichlet distribution, 607, 610 Discordant pair, 57бҺҗ59 Discrete choice models, 298бҺҗ300, 302, 527,
624 Discreteness and conservatism, 18бҺҗ20, 93бҺҗ94,
257 Discriminant analysis, 196 Dispersion parameters, 131, 133, 285бҺҗ286, 560 Dissimilarity index, 329бҺҗ330 Diversity index, 596 Dummy variables, 178бҺҗ179
Ecological inference, 527 Effect modifier, 54 EM algorithm, 522бҺҗ523, 540бҺҗ541 Empirical Bayes, 526, 610 Empirical logit, 168 Empty cells, 392 Entropy, 57, 613 Estimated expected frequencies, 25, 78, 315 Estimating equations, 470, 481бҺҗ482 Exact confidence intervals, 18бҺҗ20, 99бҺҗ101, 255 Exact tests
binomial parameter, 18, 412 conditional independence, 254, 298 Fisher, 91бҺҗ97, 253 I = J tables, 97бҺҗ98, 104 logistic regression, 251бҺҗ257 matched pairs, 412 ordinal variables, 114 StatXact and LogXact, 633, 635, 640, 643 trend in proportions, 98 unconditional test, 94бҺҗ96, 104, 114 Expected frequencies, 22, 25, Exponential dispersion family, 133, 310 Exponential distribution, 313, 388 Exponential family, 116, 133 Extreme-value distribution, 249бҺҗ250, 264
Fisher, R. A., 22бҺҗ23, 622бҺҗ624, 626, 628 df argument with Pearson, 622бҺҗ623

variance test, 163 Fisher scoring, 145бҺҗ149, 156, 247, 623, 625 FisherвҖҷs exact test, 91бҺҗ97, 99, 253, 623 and Bayes approach, 608 conservativism, 93бҺҗ94 controversy, 95бҺҗ96, 104 software, 635 UMPU, 104 versus unconditional test, 95бҺҗ96, 104, 114 Fitted values, 121 asymptotic distribution, 194, 341, 585бҺҗ586,
593 FreemanбҺҗTukey chi-squared, 112, 594
G2 statistic, see Likelihood-ratio statistic G2 ЕҪ M0 < M1., 187, 363 Gamma, 58бҺҗ59, 88, 110, 596бҺҗ597 Gamma distribution, 559бҺҗ560, 574 GaussбҺҗHermite quadrature, 521бҺҗ522, 651 Generalized estimating equations ЕҪGEE.,
466бҺҗ475, 481бҺҗ482, 501, 557бҺҗ558, 649 Generalized additive models, 153бҺҗ155, 156,
301, 630, 636 Generalized linear mixed model ЕҪGLMM.,
417, 492 Bayesian approach, 524, 609 binary data, 492бҺҗ527 correlation nonnegative, 497, 564 count data, 563бҺҗ565 heterogeneity, interpretation, 497бҺҗ498 marginal effects, comparison, 498бҺҗ502, 535,
563бҺҗ564 marginal model, corresponding, 527,
563бҺҗ564, 574бҺҗ575 misspecification, 547бҺҗ548 model fitting, 520бҺҗ526, 527 multinomial data, 513бҺҗ516 software, 649бҺҗ653 Generalized linear model ЕҪGLM., 116бҺҗ119,
625 canonical link, 117, 148бҺҗ149, 193, 257, 472,
496 covariance matrix, 137бҺҗ138 exponential dispersion family, 133 inference using, 139бҺҗ143 likelihood equations, 135бҺҗ136, 148 model fitting, 143бҺҗ149 moments, 132бҺҗ134 multivariate, 274 variance function, 136 Generalized loglinear model, 332бҺҗ333, 464,
481, 602 Gini concentration index, 68 Goodman, L. A., 627бҺҗ629

704

SUBJECT INDEX

Goodman and Kruskal tau and lambda, 68бҺҗ69 Goodness-of-fit statistics
continuous explanatory variables, 176бҺҗ177, 197
deviance for GLMs, 118бҺҗ119, 139бҺҗ142 likelihood-ratio test, 141бҺҗ142, 186бҺҗ187,
363бҺҗ365 logistic regression, 174бҺҗ177, 186бҺҗ187, 208 loglinear models, 324 mixture summary, 565 Pearson chi-squared, 22бҺҗ26 uninformative for ungrouped data, 162 Graphical models, 357бҺҗ360, 398, 629 Grouped versus ungrouped data, 140бҺҗ141, 162,
174бҺҗ177, 208, 228 GSK method, 601 Gumbel distribution, 249
Hat matrix, 143, 225, 589 Hazard function, 301, 388, 399бҺҗ400 Heterogeneity, 130, 235бҺҗ236, 291, 377,
492бҺҗ493, 497, 499бҺҗ500, 507бҺҗ510, 538 Hierarchical models, 316, 520, 609 History, 619бҺҗ631 Homogeneity of odds ratios, 54, 183, 234бҺҗ236,
255, 258 Homogeneous association, 54, 320, 377, 407,
623 HosmerбҺҗLemeshow statistic, 177, 639 Hypergeometric distribution, 91
and binomial, 113 moments, 103, 232 multiple hypergeometric, 97 noncentral, 99
Identity link, 117, 120, 124, 128, 385, 387, 562, 565
Incomplete table, 392 Independence
conditional, see Conditional independence estimated expected frequencies, 78 exact test, see FisherвҖҷs exact test from irrelevant alternatives, 299, 302 joint, 318, 319 likelihood-ratio test, 79 loglinear model, 132, 314бҺҗ315, 336, 352 mutual, 318бҺҗ319, 353, 354 Pearson test, 78бҺҗ79 quasi, 426бҺҗ428, 432бҺҗ433, 443 residuals, 81, 111бҺҗ112 smoothing using, 85бҺҗ86 two-way table, 38бҺҗ39, 78бҺҗ79, 111 variance of proportion estimator, 113 Independent multinomial sampling, 40, 67,
339бҺҗ340

Influence diagnostics, 224бҺҗ226, 638 Information matrix, 9
GLM, 138, 145бҺҗ146 logistic regression, 193 loglinear model, 339 observed versus expected, 145бҺҗ146, 247 Interaction, 210 and odds ratios, 54 three-factor, 320 uniform, 407 Isotropy, 406 Item response models, 495 Iterative proportional fitting, 343бҺҗ345, 347 Iterative reweighted least squares, 147, 156,
195, 343
Joint independence, 318, 319
Kappa, 434бҺҗ435, 443, 453, 645 KendallвҖҷs tau and tau-b, 60, 68 Kernel smoothing, 613бҺҗ615, 616
Lambda ЕҪmeasure of association., 69 Laplace approximation, 523 Latent class models, 538бҺҗ545, 565, 571бҺҗ572,
653 Latent variable, 277бҺҗ278, 399 LD 50, 167 Leverage, 143, 589 Likelihood function, 9
generalized linear model, 133, 135 marginal likelihood, 521 Likelihood-ratio statistic, 11бҺҗ12, 24 asymptotic chi-squared distribution,
590бҺҗ591 and confidence intervals, 13, 16, 17, 78, 638 difference of deviances, 141бҺҗ142, 187,
363бҺҗ364 independence, 79 minimized by ML estimate, 590бҺҗ591 monotone property, 141 nested models, 363бҺҗ365 noncentrality, 243 nonnegative, 34, 141 partitioning, 82бҺҗ84, 363бҺҗ365, 399, 405 Pearson statistic, comparison, 24, 80, 364 as power divergence statistic, 112 sparse data, 80, 395бҺҗ397 Linear-by-linear association, 369бҺҗ373,
643бҺҗ644 and bivariate normal, 370, 399 and correlation model, 408 heterogeneous, 377 homogeneous, 377бҺҗ379, 407 score statistic, 406

SUBJECT INDEX

705

Linear logit model, 180бҺҗ182 directed inference, 236бҺҗ237 efficiency, 197 exact test, 253 likelihood equations, 209 and trend test, 197, 237бҺҗ239
Linear predictor, 116 Linear probability model, 120бҺҗ121, 291
and trend test, 181бҺҗ182 Link function, 116, 135
canonical, 117, 148бҺҗ149, 193, 257, 472, 496 cumulative, 282бҺҗ286, 301 goodness of link, 257бҺҗ258, 301 inverse cdf, 124бҺҗ125, 163, 282 Litter effects, 151бҺҗ153, 291, 556бҺҗ558, 566 Local odds ratio, 55, 312, 369бҺҗ370 asymptotic covariances, 597 conditional, 321бҺҗ322, 377 exponential family for multinomial,
310бҺҗ311 Logistic distribution, 125, 162, 197, 246 Logistic-normal distribution, 265 Logistic-normal model, 496бҺҗ513, 516бҺҗ527 Logistic regression, 121бҺҗ125, 165бҺҗ196
case-control studies, 170бҺҗ171, 418бҺҗ420, 625 categorical predictors, 177бҺҗ186 conditional, 250бҺҗ258, 414бҺҗ420, 495бҺҗ496,
526, 625, 640, 645 conditional independence, 183бҺҗ184, 231 covariance matrix, 193бҺҗ194 design, 196, 609 diagnostics, 219бҺҗ230, 257бҺҗ258 existence of ML estimates, 195бҺҗ196,
394бҺҗ395 fitting model, 192бҺҗ196 generalized linear model, 117, 121бҺҗ125 goodness-of-fit, 174бҺҗ177, 186бҺҗ187, 197 inference, 172бҺҗ177 interpretation, 166бҺҗ171, 191 likelihood equations, 192бҺҗ193 linear logit model, see Linear logit model loglinear models, connection, 315, 330бҺҗ332,
367, 593бҺҗ594 marginal models, 414, 456бҺҗ476 matched pairs, 414бҺҗ420, 493бҺҗ496 model-building, 211бҺҗ225 multiple predictors, 182бҺҗ195 nonparametric mixture, 546бҺҗ547, 653 normal distribution connection, 171,
207бҺҗ208 and odds ratio, 124, 166 perfect discrimination, 195бҺҗ196 probability estimators, 166бҺҗ167, 191, 194 random effects, 496бҺҗ513, 516бҺҗ527 regressive logistic model, 479бҺҗ481

repeated binary response, 414бҺҗ420, 456бҺҗ476, 496бҺҗ513, 516бҺҗ527
repeated multinomial response, 461бҺҗ464, 469, 474бҺҗ475, 513бҺҗ516
residuals, 219бҺҗ223 sample size determination, 242бҺҗ243 sample size and number of predictors, 212 software, 637бҺҗ643, 645, 649бҺҗ651 Logit transform, 75, 117, 624 bias, 196 confidence interval, 109 in logistic regression, 123 standard error, 74бҺҗ75 Wald test of proportion, 208бҺҗ209 Loglinear models, 117бҺҗ118, 314бҺҗ347,
627бҺҗ629 covariance matrix, 138бҺҗ139, 338, 341, 593,
598 existence of estimates, 341, 392бҺҗ395 fitting, 342бҺҗ344 four dimensions, 326бҺҗ330, 355 generalized loglinear model, 332бҺҗ333, 464,
481 generalized linear model, 117бҺҗ118, 125бҺҗ132 goodness of fit, 337бҺҗ338 homogeneous association, 320, 377 independence, 232, 314бҺҗ315, 318бҺҗ319, 336,
352, 365бҺҗ366 likelihood equations, 334бҺҗ336 linear-by-linear association, 369бҺҗ373,
377бҺҗ379 logit models, connection, 315, 330бҺҗ332, 367,
593бҺҗ594 ordinal variables, 367бҺҗ377 parameter definition, 316бҺҗ317, 352бҺҗ353 Poisson-multinomial connection, 317бҺҗ318,
339бҺҗ340 probability estimates, 340бҺҗ341 rates, 385бҺҗ391 saturated, 316, 380 selection, 360бҺҗ366 software, 643бҺҗ644 square-tables, 424бҺҗ431 three-factor interaction, 320 ЕҪ X, Y, Z. type symbols, 320бҺҗ321 Log link, 118, 124, 125, 132, 138, 140, 314, 560,
563 Log-log models, 248бҺҗ250, 283 Longitudinal studies, see Repeated response Lowess, 154
MannбҺҗWhitney statistic, 90, 301, 452бҺҗ453 Mantel, N., 625 MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimator, 234бҺҗ235, 417,
639

706

SUBJECT INDEX

MantelбҺҗHaenszel test, see CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel test
Mantel score test, 87, 88, 89, 379 Marginal distribution, 37. See also Marginal
models Marginal likelihood, 521 Marginal homogeneity
binary matched pairs, 410бҺҗ413 and independence, 111 nominal tests, 422бҺҗ423, 457бҺҗ459 ordinal tests, 421, 452бҺҗ453, 458 multi-way table, 439бҺҗ442, 456бҺҗ459,
647бҺҗ649 Marginal models, 414, 420бҺҗ423, 439бҺҗ442,
456бҺҗ476 conditional models, comparison,
498бҺҗ502 GEE approach, 466бҺҗ475 ML fitting, 464бҺҗ466, 481 odds ratio, 451, 494 software, 644бҺҗ649 Marginal symmetry, 442 Marginal table, 48 same association as partial table, 358бҺҗ360,
398 Markov chains, 477бҺҗ481, 482, 489бҺҗ490 Matched pairs, 409бҺҗ454
CochranбҺҗMantelбҺҗHaenszel approach, 413 dependent proportions, 410бҺҗ412 logistic models, 414бҺҗ420, 493бҺҗ496, 516бҺҗ517 McNemar test, 411бҺҗ413, 424, 442, 644бҺҗ645 odds ratio estimates, 417, 451, 494 ordinal data, 420бҺҗ421, 429бҺҗ431, 439, 443,
452бҺҗ453, 462бҺҗ464, 536 random effects, 417бҺҗ418, 493бҺҗ494, 535 Maximum likelihood, 9 conditional, 100, 417, 494бҺҗ496, 526 inconsistent estimator, 450 iterative reweighted least squares, 147, 156,
195, 343 likelihood function, see Likelihood function versus other methods, 468, 603бҺҗ605, 612 McNemar test, 411бҺҗ413, 424, 442, 644бҺҗ645 Mean response model, 291бҺҗ294 Measurement error, 347, 493 Measures of association, 43бҺҗ47, 54бҺҗ60, 68бҺҗ69,
620бҺҗ622 asymptotic normality, 110 comparing several values, 599 Mendel, 22бҺҗ23, 623 Mid-distribution function, 34 Mid-P-value, 20, 27, 33, 104 Midranks, 89, 90, 302 Minimum chi-squared, 112, 611бҺҗ612, 616, 618,
629

Minimum discrimination information, 112, 612бҺҗ613, 616
Misclassification error, 347 Missing data, 103, 347, 463, 475бҺҗ476, 482 Mixture models, 538бҺҗ566. See also
Generalized linear mixed models ML, see Maximum likelihood Model-based inference
improved precision of estimation, 85, 112, 174, 239бҺҗ240, 264
model-based tests, 141бҺҗ142, 172, 363бҺҗ365, 396, 399
Model matrix, 135 Monotone trends, 88. See also Trend tests Monte Carlo methods, 114, 522бҺҗ525, 609,
629бҺҗ630, 635 Multicollinearity, 212 Multilevel models, 520, 609, 651 Multinomial distribution, 6бҺҗ7
binomial factorization, 289 exponential family, 310бҺҗ311 inference, 21бҺҗ26, 35 mean, correlation, covariance, 7, 31,
579бҺҗ580, 596 and Poisson, 8бҺҗ9, 40 sampling models, 40бҺҗ41, 67 Multinomial logit models, 267бҺҗ291, 298бҺҗ300,
302, 624, 640бҺҗ643, 651бҺҗ653 Multinomial loglinear model, 317бҺҗ318,
339бҺҗ341 Multinomial response models, 267бҺҗ300,
640бҺҗ643 Mutual independence, 318бҺҗ319, 353, 354
National Halothane Study, 627, 629 Natural exponential family, 116, 133, 155 Natural parameter, 133 Negative binomial
distribution, 31, 161, 163, 560, 566, 574 regression model, 131, 560бҺҗ563, 565, 566,
653 Nested models
likelihood-ratio comparison, 141бҺҗ142, 187, 363бҺҗ364
simultaneous tests, 263 using X 2, 364 NewtonбҺҗRaphson, 143бҺҗ146, 163бҺҗ164 and Fisher scoring, 145, 247 IPF, comparison, 344бҺҗ345 logistic regression, 194бҺҗ195 loglinear models, 342бҺҗ345 Neyman, J., 626 Nominal variable, 2бҺҗ3 baseline-category logit models, 267бҺҗ274,
300, 310бҺҗ311, 426, 515, 640бҺҗ643

SUBJECT INDEX

707

Nominal variable ЕҪContinued. matched pairs, 422бҺҗ423 measures of association, 55бҺҗ57, 68бҺҗ69 square table models, 425бҺҗ433, 439бҺҗ442
Noncentral chi-squared distribution, 237, 258
asymptotic representation, 591бҺҗ592, 595 noncentrality parameter, 237, 243бҺҗ245,
408, 597 power and df, 237бҺҗ239 Nonparametric random effects, 545бҺҗ553,
565бҺҗ566, 653 Normal distribution
asymptotic normality, see Delta method and chi-squared, 82 and logistic regression, 171, 207бҺҗ208 underlying categorical data, 112, 264, 370,
620
O, o rates of convergence, 577, 595 Observational study, 43 Odds, 44 Odds ratio, 44, 620
bias, 70, 595 case-control studies, 46бҺҗ47 conditional, 51бҺҗ54, 255, 321, 417, 451 conditional ML estimate, 255, 417 confidence interval, 71, 77бҺҗ78, 99бҺҗ102, 255,
256 cumulative, 67 exact inference, 99бҺҗ101, 253, 255 homogeneity, in 2 = 2 = K tables, 54, 183,
234бҺҗ236, 255 I = J tables, 55бҺҗ56, 581, 597 invariance properties, 45бҺҗ46, 59 local, see Local odds ratio MantelбҺҗHaenszel estimator, 234бҺҗ235 marginal, 451, 494 matched pairs, 415бҺҗ418, 451 logistic regression parameters, 124, 166, 171,
179, 183, 331, 415, 497бҺҗ500 loglinear model parameters, 315, 316, 321,
331, 369 ordinal variables, see Local odds ratio relation to relative risk, 47, 124, 624 standard error, 71, 75бҺҗ77, 581, 597 Offset, 385 Ordinal variables, 2бҺҗ3 cumulative link models, 282бҺҗ286 cumulative logit models, 274бҺҗ282, 301,
420бҺҗ421 efficiency, 197, 301 exact tests, 98, 253 improved power, 88бҺҗ90, 236бҺҗ239, 373 loglinear models, 367бҺҗ377, 399

marginal models, 420бҺҗ421, 429бҺҗ430, 440бҺҗ441, 462бҺҗ464
matched pairs, 420бҺҗ421, 429бҺҗ431, 439, 443, 452бҺҗ454, 462бҺҗ464
mean response model, 291бҺҗ294 measures of association, 57бҺҗ59, 67, 68 multinomial response models, 274бҺҗ295 ordinal quasi symmetry, 429бҺҗ430, 440бҺҗ441,
647 repeated response, 461бҺҗ464, 469, 474бҺҗ475,
514бҺҗ515, 517бҺҗ520 scores, choice of, 88бҺҗ90, 383бҺҗ384 testing independence, 86бҺҗ91, 373 Overdispersion, 493 binomial, 8, 30, 151бҺҗ153, 291, 555бҺҗ558, 573,
653 litter effects, 151бҺҗ153, 291, 556бҺҗ558, 566 Poisson, 7бҺҗ8, 130бҺҗ131, 636 quasi-likelihood, 151бҺҗ153, 291, 555бҺҗ558, 653
Paired comparisons, see BradleyбҺҗTerry model Parallel odds models, 374бҺҗ375 Partial tables, 48 Partitioning
chi-squared statistic, 82бҺҗ84, 112бҺҗ113, 365, 399, 405
and combining rows, 112 I = J tables, 82бҺҗ83 nested models, 365 trend test, 181, 373 Pattern mixture model, 476 Pearson, Karl, 619бҺҗ623, 628 arguments with Fisher, Yule, 79, 619бҺҗ623 goodness of fit, 22бҺҗ24, 79 Pearson chi-squared statistic, 22бҺҗ26, 79,
111бҺҗ112 asymptotic chi-squared distribution,
589бҺҗ590 asymptotic conditional distribution, 103 continuity correction, 103 degrees of freedom, 25, 79, 622 and z for difference of proportions, 111 goodness of fit, 22бҺҗ26 independence, 78бҺҗ79, 111бҺҗ112, 622 and likelihood-ratio, comparison, 24, 80, 364 minimizing, 112, 611бҺҗ612, 616, 618, 629 moments, 103 multinomial parameters, 22бҺҗ26 nested models, 364 noncentral chi-squared distribution, see
Noncentral chi-squared distribution score statistic, 24 sparse data, 80, 395бҺҗ397 with ungrouped data, 162 upper bound, 112

708

SUBJECT INDEX

Pearson residual, 81, 142, 588бҺҗ589, 593 binomial GLM, 220, 555, 638 Poisson GLM, 142, 366, 588
Penalized likelihood, 614бҺҗ615 Penalized quasi likelihood ЕҪPQL., 523бҺҗ524 Perfect contingency tables, 398 Perfect discrimination, 195бҺҗ196 Phi-squared, 112 Poisson distribution, 7
comparing means, 31 exponential family, 117, 134 moments, 7, 31 and multinomial, 8бҺҗ9, 40, and negative binomial, 131, 559бҺҗ560, 566,
574 overdispersion, 7бҺҗ8, 130бҺҗ131, 636 Poisson sampling, 39 variance test, 163 Poisson models counts, 125бҺҗ132, 155, 563бҺҗ565 deviance, 140 loglinear model, 117бҺҗ118, 125бҺҗ132,
138бҺҗ139, 232, 314бҺҗ347 overdispersion, 130бҺҗ131, 150бҺҗ151, 636 random effects, 563бҺҗ565 rates, 385бҺҗ391, 399бҺҗ400 Polytomous logit models, 267бҺҗ291 Population-averaged effects, 414, 495, 499бҺҗ501 Positive likelihood-ratio dependence, 406 Power calculating, 240бҺҗ245, 640 increased, for directed alternatives, 88бҺҗ90,
236бҺҗ239, 373 and noncentrality, 237бҺҗ239, 243бҺҗ245 and number of ordinal categories, 301 Power-divergence statistic, 112, 613 Prediction, 525бҺҗ526 Probit model, 124бҺҗ125, 246бҺҗ247, 258, 623, 640 discrete choice, 302 likelihood equations, 265 normal parameters, 163, 246, 264 ordinal data, 278, 283, 301, 312, 641 random effects, 535 threshold and utility motivations, 264 Profile likelihood confidence interval, 78, 512,
638 Propensity score, 196 Proportional hazards model, 283бҺҗ284, 301,
389, 643 Proportional odds, see Cumulative logit
models Proportional reduction in variation, 56бҺҗ57,
67бҺҗ68 Proportions
admissible estimator, 605

asymptotic distribution, 585бҺҗ588, 593 Bayesian inference, 605бҺҗ607 confidence interval, 15бҺҗ17, 32бҺҗ33, 635 dependent, 410бҺҗ412 difference, see Difference of proportions ratio, see Relative risk standard error, 11, 340бҺҗ341 P-value mid-P-value, 20, 27, 33, 104 randomized, 27, 32 UMVU estimator, 162
Qualitative variable, 3бҺҗ4 Quantitative variable, 3бҺҗ4 Quasi-association, 431, 453бҺҗ454 Quasi-independence, 426бҺҗ428, 432бҺҗ433, 443 Quasi-likelihood
binary models, 151бҺҗ153, 291, 555бҺҗ558 count models, 150бҺҗ151 GLM, 149бҺҗ153, 156 multivariate ЕҪGEE., 466бҺҗ475, 481бҺҗ482, 625 overdispersion, 150бҺҗ153, 291, 555бҺҗ558 Quasi-symmetry, 425бҺҗ431, 433бҺҗ434, 451, 454,
646бҺҗ647 and BradleyбҺҗTerry model, 438бҺҗ439 and marginal homogeneity, 428бҺҗ430 multiway tables, 440бҺҗ441 and Rasch model, 552бҺҗ553, 565
Raking a table, 345бҺҗ346, 347, 643 Random component of GLM, 116, 133 Random effects, 417, 492бҺҗ527 Random intercept, 493 Ranks, 89, 90, 298, 301, 302 Rasch mixture model, 548бҺҗ551, 653 Rasch model, 495бҺҗ496, 517, 526, 535, 565, 624 Rates, 385бҺҗ391, 399бҺҗ400 RC model, 379бҺҗ381, 399бҺҗ400 Regressive logistic model, 479бҺҗ481 Relative risk, 43бҺҗ44
asymptotic standard error, 73 collapsibility, 398 confidence interval, 73, 77 homogeneity, 258 in model, 124 and odds ratio, 47, 624 Repeated response, 409бҺҗ517. See also
Generalized linear mixed models; Marginal models; Matched pairs Residuals, 142бҺҗ143, 156 asymptotic distribution, 587бҺҗ589 binomial GLMs, 219бҺҗ223 deviance, see Deviance residual Pearson, see Pearson residual Poisson GLMs, 143, 366бҺҗ367

SUBJECT INDEX
standardized Pearson, see Standardized Pearson residual
Retrospective study, 42бҺҗ43. See also Casecontrol study
logistic regression, 170бҺҗ171 odds ratio, 46бҺҗ47 Ridits, 111, 406 ROC curve, 228бҺҗ230, 258 Row and column effects model, see RC
model Row effects model, 374бҺҗ376, 643бҺҗ644 R-squared type measure
logistic regression, 226бҺҗ228, 258 nominal association, 56бҺҗ57, 67бҺҗ68
Sample size determination, 240бҺҗ245 Sampling methods, 39бҺҗ43 Sampling zero, 392 Sandwich estimator, 471бҺҗ474 SAS, 632бҺҗ643 Saturated model, 119, 139, 382
logit models, 178, loglinear models, 316, 380 Scaled deviance, 140 Scores choice of, 88бҺҗ90, 383бҺҗ384 efficiency, 197, 301 in loglinear models, 369бҺҗ379, 407 in trend test, 88бҺҗ89, 181бҺҗ182, 406 Score statistic, 12, 26бҺҗ27 confidence intervals, 15бҺҗ16, 77 logistic regression, 232, 297бҺҗ298 Pearson statistic, 24 and standardized residuals, 156 trend test, 182 Selection model, 475бҺҗ476 Sensitivity, 38, 60, 228бҺҗ230 Simpson diversity index, 596 SimpsonвҖҷs paradox, 51, 59бҺҗ60, 224, 354, 621 Small-area estimation, 502бҺҗ504 Small samples adding constants to cells, 397бҺҗ398 alternative asymptotics, 233, 396бҺҗ397 exact inference, 18бҺҗ20, 91бҺҗ101, 104,
251бҺҗ257 existence of estimates, 195бҺҗ196, 341,
392бҺҗ395 model-based tests, 187, 251бҺҗ257 X 2 and G2, 24, 80, 364, 395бҺҗ397 zeros, 392бҺҗ398 Smoothing Bayes, 606бҺҗ610 generalized additive model, 153бҺҗ155 improved estimation with model, 85, 112,
174, 239бҺҗ240, 264

709
kernel, 613бҺҗ615, 616 penalized likelihood, 614бҺҗ615 Software, 632бҺҗ653 SAS, 632бҺҗ643 StatXact and LogXact, 633, 635, 640, 643 SomersвҖҷ d, 68 Sparse data, 391бҺҗ398, 187, 250бҺҗ257, 591 asymptotics, 233, 396бҺҗ397 SpearmanвҖҷs rho, 90 Specificity, 38, 60, 228бҺҗ230 Square tables, 409бҺҗ454 Standardized table, 345бҺҗ346 Standardized parameter estimate, 191бҺҗ192,
197 Standardized Pearson residual, 81, 143, 589
binomial GLMs, 220, 638 and Pearson statistic, 112 Poisson GLMs, 143, 367, 634 as score statistic, 156 StatXact, 633, 635, 640, 643 Stepwise model-building, 213бҺҗ216 Stochastic ordering, 33, 67, 301 Structural zero, 25, 392 Subject-specific effects, 414бҺҗ420, 491, 498бҺҗ500 Sufficient statistics, 148, 250бҺҗ257, 273, 334,
336 Suppressor variable, 67 Survival data, 385бҺҗ391 Symmetric association, 425 Symmetry, 424бҺҗ425, 644бҺҗ647
complete, 440 multiway, 439бҺҗ442 Systematic component of GLM, 116
Tetrachoric correlation, 620 Three-factor interaction, 320 Threshold model, 264, 277бҺҗ279 Tolerance distribution, 245бҺҗ246 Transformations, 595, 596 Transition probabilities, 477, 490 Transitional model, 464, 476бҺҗ481, 482 Tree-structured methods, 257, 631 Trend tests, 86бҺҗ90, 103, 296, 373, 379
CochranбҺҗArmitage for proportions, 90, 181бҺҗ182, 237бҺҗ239
efficiency, 197, 301 exact, 253 software, 634, 635
Uncertainty coefficient, 57 Uniform association model, 312, 369бҺҗ370, 377 Uniform interaction model, 407 Uniqueness of ML estimate, 341 Utility, 264

710
Variance asymptotic, see Delta method components, 492, 525 in exponential family, 134 stabilizing, 596, 626 test for Poisson, 163 variance function, 136, 149бҺҗ150
Wald statistic, 11, 27 and power, 172, 208бҺҗ209
Wald confidence intervals, 13 adjusted intervals, 33, 102
Weight matrix, 138, 155, 164 Weighted kappa, 435, 443, 645 Weighted observation, 391 Weighted least squares, 481, 600бҺҗ604,
615, 629

SUBJECT INDEX
and minimum modified chi-squared, 611, 612
and ML estimation, 146бҺҗ148, 603бҺҗ604 Wilcoxon test, 90, 301 WLS, see Weighted least squares
X 2 statistic, see Pearson chi-squared statistic X 2 ЕҪ M0 < M1., 364
Yates continuity correction, 103 Yule, G. U., 620бҺҗ621, 628 YuleвҖҷs Q, 68, 110
Zero cell count adding constants, 70бҺҗ71, 397бҺҗ398 effects on estimates, 70бҺҗ71, 78, 256 sampling, 392 structural, 25, 392

