arXiv (2021)

Submitted December/21; Published December/21

arXiv:2112.06560v1 [cs.LG] 13 Dec 2021

HiClass: a Python library for local hierarchical classiﬁcation compatible with scikit-learn

F´abio M. Miranda∗

fabio.malchermiranda@hpi.de

Hasso Plattner Institute, Digital Engineering Faculty, University of Potsdam,

14482 Potsdam, Germany

Niklas K¨oehnecke∗

niklas.koehnecke@student.hpi.uni-potsdam.de

Hasso Plattner Institute, Digital Engineering Faculty, University of Potsdam,

14482 Potsdam, Germany

Bernhard Y. Renard

bernhard.renard@hpi.de

Hasso Plattner Institute, Digital Engineering Faculty, University of Potsdam,

14482 Potsdam, Germany

Editor: Unknown

Abstract
HiClass is an open-source Python package for local hierarchical classiﬁcation fully compatible with scikit-learn. It provides implementations of the most popular machine learning models for local hierarchical classiﬁcation, including Local Classiﬁer Per Node, Local Classiﬁer Per Parent Node and Local Classiﬁer Per Level. In addition, the library includes tools to evaluate model performance on hierarchical data. The documentation contains installation instructions, interactive notebooks, and a complete description of the API. HiClass is distributed under the simpliﬁed BSD license, encouraging its use in both academic and commercial settings. Source code and documentation are available at https://gitlab.com/dacs-hpi/hiclass. Keywords: Local Hierarchical Classiﬁcation, Supervised Learning, Python
1. Introduction
Many classiﬁcation problems across diﬀerent application domains can be naturally modeled hierarchically (Figure 1), typically in the form of trees or directed acyclic graphs (Silla and Freitas, 2011). Examples of hierarchical classiﬁcation problems are vast, ranging from musical genre classiﬁcation (Ariyaratne and Zhang, 2012; Iloga et al., 2018) to text categorization (Javed et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022), taxonomic classiﬁcation of viral sequences in metagenomic data (Shang and Sun, 2021) and identiﬁcation of COVID-19 in chest X-ray images (Pereira et al., 2020).
Nonetheless, many classiﬁers proposed in the literature are designed to completely ignore the existing hierarchy between classes, usually predicting only leaf nodes, in a methodology known as ﬂat approach. Although easy to implement, the ﬂat approach is incapable of dealing with problems where prediction of leaf nodes is not mandatory. Furthermore, since they consider the hierarchy during training, hierarchical models generally produce better results when compared with ﬂat approaches, consistently achieving improvements in predic-
∗Fa´bio M. Miranda and Niklas Koehnecke contributed equally to this article.
©2021 F´abio M. Miranda, Niklas Koehnecke and Bernhard Y. Renard.

Miranda, Koehnecke and Renard
tive performance (Silla and Freitas, 2011). Hence, in this manuscript we introduce HiClass, a python library that implements the most common patterns for local hierarchical classiﬁers (Figure 1), which can be employed in diﬀerent application domains where the data can be hierarchically structured in the shape of trees or directed acyclic graphs. While ideally the full hierarchical structure is known, classiﬁcation is also possible with only partially known structures and missing values in intermediate levels of the hierarchy.
Figure 1: Depiction of the ﬂat approach and the local hierarchical classiﬁcation models implemented in HiClass, for a two-level hierarchy. a) Flat approach, where a single multi-class classiﬁer is trained to predict only the leaf nodes in hierarchical data, completely ignoring previous levels of the hierarchy. b) Local classiﬁer per node, where several binary classiﬁers are trained for each existing node in the hierarchy, excluding the root node. c) Local classiﬁer per parent node, where various multi-class classiﬁers are trained for each parent node in the hierarchy, with the goal of predicting the children nodes. d) Local classiﬁer per level, where a multi-class classiﬁer is trained for each level in the hierarchy.
2. Overview and Design
The API of HiClass is designed to be compatible with the scikit-learn API (Pedregosa et al., 2011), oﬀering users a familiar API to train hierarchical models via fit(), store
2

HiClass: a Python library for local hierarchical classification compatible with scikit-learn

trained models with pickle and predict labels with the predict() method. Moreover, each local classiﬁer in HiClass is by default scikit-learn’s BaseEstimator class, enabling users to employ any of the classiﬁers already implemented in scikit-learn’s library. However, classes other than the BaseEstimator can also be used, as long as they implement the methods fit(), predict() and clone(), thus enabling users to code their own local classiﬁers using third-party libraries, e.g., TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) or PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019).

To allow a better integration with scikit-learn and faster training, HiClass uses for both features and labels numpy’s structured arrays, whose data type is a composition of simpler data types (Harris et al., 2020). While features are exactly the same shape as expected for training ﬂat models in scikit-learn, hierarchical training labels are represented as an array of shape n samples × n levels, where each column must contain either a label for the respective level in the hierarchy or a placeholder that indicates missing labels in the hierarchical structure.

The directed acyclic graph (DAG) implemented in the library NetworkX (Hagberg et al., 2008) was the data structure chosen to make the models as generic as possible, since hierarchical data in the form of trees can also be represented with a DAG. Training is performed in parallel for each local classiﬁer, while prediction, which is not a bottleneck, is performed from top to bottom, following the hierarchical structure to keep consistency among the several hierarchical levels.

According to Silla and Freitas (2011), the use of ﬂat classiﬁcation metrics might not be

adequate to give enough insight of which algorithm is better at classifying hierarchical data.

Hence, in HiClass we implemented the metrics of hierarchical precision (hP), hierarchical

recall (hR) and hierarchical f-score (hF), which are extensions of the renowned metrics of

precision, recall and f-score, but tailored to the hierarchical classiﬁcation scenario. These hi-

erarchical counterparts were initially proposed by Kiritchenko et al. (2006), and are deﬁned

as follows:

hP =

i |αi ∩ βi| , hR = i |αi|

i |αi ∩ βi| , hF = 2 × hP × hR

i |βi|

hP + hR

where αi is the set consisting of the most speciﬁc classes predicted for test example i and all their ancestor classes, while βi is the set containing the true most speciﬁc classes of test example i and all their ancestors, with summations computed over all test examples.

3. Code Quality Assurance
To ensure high code quality, inheritance is applied whenever possible to keep the code concise and easier to maintain, and all implementations adhere to the PEP 8 code style (Van Rossum et al., 2001) enforced by flake8 and the uncompromising code formatter black. Documentation is provided through docstrings (Goodger and van Rossum, 2010), and the implementations are accompanied by unit tests that cover 99% of our code and are automatically executed by our continuous integration workflow upon commits.
3

Miranda, Koehnecke and Renard
4. Installation and Usage
HiClass is hosted on GitLab1, interactive tutorials in the form of notebooks are available on the platform Google Colab2 and API documentation is hosted on Read the Docs3. Packages for Python 3.8.3 and above are available for Linux, macOS and Windows and can be obtained with pip install hiclass or conda install -c conda-forge hiclass. Algorithm 1 shows a basic example of ﬁtting and evaluating a local hierarchical model with HiClass. More elaborate examples can be found in the interactive tutorials.
1 from hiclass.metrics import f1 2 from hiclass import LocalClassifierPerNode 3 from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
4
5 # Import data 6 X_train , X_test = get_features() # (n_samples , n_features) 7 Y_train , Y_test = get_labels() # (n_samples , n_levels)
8
9 # Use random forest classifiers for every node 10 rf = R a n d o m F o r e s t C l a s s i f i e r () 11 lcpn = L o c a l C l a s s i f i e r P e r N o d e ( l oc a l _ cl a s s i fi e r = rf ) 12 lcpn . fit ( X_train , Y_train ) # Train hierarchical classifier 13 predictions = lcpn . predict ( X_test ) # Predict test data
14
15 # Print hierarchical f - score 16 print ( " f1 : %.2 f " % ( round ( f1 ( y_true = Y_test , y_pred = predictions ) , 3) ) )
Algorithm 1: Example on how to use HiClass to train and evaluate a hierarchical classiﬁer.
5. Comparison with Flat Classiﬁers
While HiClass focuses on ease of use and is fully written in a high level language, care has been taken to maximize computational eﬃciency. In Figure 2, we compare the hierarchical fscore and computational resources (measured with the command time) between a couple of ﬂat classiﬁers with default parameters from the library scikit-learn and the local hierarchical classiﬁers implemented in HiClass, where each local classiﬁer contains the same parameters of the corresponding ﬂat classiﬁer (see Supplementary Table S1 for hierarchical precision and recall). For comparison purposes, we used the amazon product review dataset4, which contains 40,000 instances for training and 10,000 more for validation. The benchmark was computed on a cluster node running GNU/Linux with 512 GB physical memory and 128 cores provided by two AMD EPYC™ 7742 processors.
Our results reveal that the hierarchical f-score was enhanced by all local hierarchical approaches when compared with the logistic regression ﬂat classiﬁer, while training time and memory usage were greatly reduced with the local classiﬁers per node and per parent node. However, when compared with the random forest ﬂat classiﬁer, only the local classiﬁer
1. https://gitlab.com/dacs-hpi/hiclass 2. https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1Idzht9dNoB85pjc9gOL24t9ksrXZEA-9?usp=sharing 3. https://hiclass.readthedocs.io/ 4. https://www.kaggle.com/kashnitsky/hierarchical-text-classification
4

HiClass: a Python library for local hierarchical classification compatible with scikit-learn
per node improved the hierarchical f-score, but both local classiﬁers per node and per parent node still showed a considerable decline in memory consumption.
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
Figure 2: Comparison between ﬂat approaches and local hierarchical classiﬁers implemented in HiClass. For this benchmark, the metrics used were hierarchical f-score computed for the 3 diﬀerent hierarchical levels in the amazon product review dataset, time in seconds and memory usage in gigabyte. Overall, the hierarchical classiﬁer per node improved the hierarchical f-score and reduced memory consumption when compared with the ﬂat approaches.
6. Conclusion
HiClass is a Python package that provides implementations of popular machine learning models and evaluation metrics for local hierarchical classiﬁcation. Thanks to its compatibility with the scikit-learn API, users can choose among existing classiﬁers to create powerful hierarchical classiﬁers for hierarchical data.
Acknowledgments
BYR gratefully acknowledges support by the BMBF-funded Computational Life Science initiative (project DeepPath, 031L0208, to B.Y.R.).
5

Miranda, Koehnecke and Renard
References
Mart´ın Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th {USENIX} symposium on operating systems design and implementation ({OSDI} 16), pages 265–283, 2016.
Hasitha B Ariyaratne and Dengsheng Zhang. A novel automatic hierachical approach to music genre classiﬁcation. In 2012 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops, pages 564–569. IEEE, 2012.
David Goodger and Guido van Rossum. Docstring conventions. In Pro Python, pages 303–307. Springer, 2010.
Aric Hagberg, Pieter Swart, and Daniel S Chult. Exploring network structure, dynamics, and function using networkx. Technical report, Los Alamos National Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States), 2008.
Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, St´efan J van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array programming with numpy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.
Sylvain Iloga, Olivier Romain, and Maurice Tchuent´e. A sequential pattern mining approach to design taxonomies for hierarchical music genre recognition. Pattern Analysis and Applications, 21(2):363–380, 2018.
Taimoor Ahmed Javed, Waseem Shahzad, and Umair Arshad. Hierarchical text classiﬁcation of urdu news using deep neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03141, 2021.
Svetlana Kiritchenko, Stan Matwin, Richard Nock, and A Fazel Famili. Learning and evaluation in the presence of class hierarchies: Application to text categorization. In Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence, pages 395– 406. Springer, 2006.
Yinglong Ma, Xiaofeng Liu, Lijiao Zhao, Yue Liang, Peng Zhang, and Beihong Jin. Hybrid embedding-based text representation for hierarchical multi-label text classiﬁcation. Expert Systems with Applications, 187:115905, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32:8026–8037, 2019.
Fabian Pedregosa, Ga¨el Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
6

HiClass: a Python library for local hierarchical classification compatible with scikit-learn Rodolfo M Pereira, Diego Bertolini, Lucas O Teixeira, Carlos N Silla Jr, and Yandre MG
Costa. Covid-19 identiﬁcation in chest x-ray images on ﬂat and hierarchical classiﬁcation scenarios. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 194:105532, 2020. Jiayu Shang and Yanni Sun. Cheer: hierarchical taxonomic classiﬁcation for viral metagenomic data via deep learning. Methods, 189:95–103, 2021. Carlos N Silla and Alex A Freitas. A survey of hierarchical classiﬁcation across diﬀerent application domains. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 22(1):31–72, 2011. Guido Van Rossum, Barry Warsaw, and Nick Coghlan. Pep 8: style guide for python code. Python. org, 1565, 2001.
7

