See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221442185
Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies: Application to Text Categorization
Conference Paper in Advances in Artificial Intelligence · June 2006
DOI: 10.1007/11766247_34 · Source: DBLP

CITATIONS
81
4 authors, including:
Svetlana Kiritchenko National Research Council Canada 63 PUBLICATIONS 5,778 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Fazel Famili University of Ottawa 71 PUBLICATIONS 1,190 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

READS
364
Richard Nock Université des Antilles 233 PUBLICATIONS 4,437 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter at SemEval View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Svetlana Kiritchenko on 04 June 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

NRC Publications Archive (NPArC) Archives des publications du CNRC (NPArC)
Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies: Application to Text Categorization Kiritchenko, Svetlana; Famili, Fazel; Matwin, S.; Nock, R.
Web page / page Web http://nparc.cisti-icist.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/npsi/ctrl?action=rtdoc&an=5763573&lang=en http://nparc.cisti-icist.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/npsi/ctrl?action=rtdoc&an=5763573&lang=fr
Access and use of this website and the material on it are subject to the Terms and Conditions set forth at http://nparc.cisti-icist.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/npsi/jsp/nparc_cp.jsp?lang=en READ THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE USING THIS WEBSITE. L’accès à ce site Web et l’utilisation de son contenu sont assujettis aux conditions présentées dans le site http://nparc.cisti-icist.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/npsi/jsp/nparc_cp.jsp?lang=fr LISEZ CES CONDITIONS ATTENTIVEMENT AVANT D’UTILISER CE SITE WEB. Contact us / Contactez nous: nparc.cisti@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.

National Research Council Canada
Institute for Information Technology

Conseil national de recherches Canada
Institut de technologie de l'information

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies: Application to Text Categorization *
Kiritchenko, S., Famili, F., Matwin, S., and Nock, R. June 2006

* published in the Proceedings of the 19th Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Québec City, Québec, Canada. June 7-9, 2006. NRC 48737.

Copyright 2006 by National Research Council of Canada
Permission is granted to quote short excerpts and to reproduce figures and tables from this report, provided that the source of such material is fully acknowledged.

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies: Application to Text Categorization
Svetlana Kiritchenko1,4, Stan Matwin1,2, Richard Nock3, and A. Fazel Famili4
1 University of Ottawa, Canada {svkir, stan}@site.uottawa.ca 2 Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland 3 Universit´e Antilles-Guyane, Martinique, France
rnock@martinique.univ-ag.fr 4 Institute for Information Technology, National Research Council Canada
Fazel.Famili@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Abstract. This paper deals with categorization tasks where categories are partially ordered to form a hierarchy. First, it introduces the notion of consistent classiﬁcation which takes into account the semantics of a class hierarchy. Then, it presents a novel global hierarchical approach that produces consistent classiﬁcation. This algorithm with AdaBoost as the underlying learning procedure signiﬁcantly outperforms the corresponding “ﬂat” approach, i.e. the approach that does not take into account the hierarchical information. In addition, the proposed algorithm surpasses the hierarchical local top-down approach on many synthetic and real tasks. For evaluation purposes, we use a novel hierarchical evaluation measure that has some attractive properties: it is simple, requires no parameter tuning, gives credit to partially correct classiﬁcation and discriminates errors by both distance and depth in a class hierarchy.
1 Introduction
Hierarchical categorization deals with categorization problems where categories (aka classes) are organized in hierarchies. More formally, categories are partially ordered, usually from more generic to more speciﬁc. The hierarchical way of organization of entities or notions is very helpful for humans to retain, ﬁnd and analyze things. Therefore, it is not surprising that people maintain large collections of articles, images or emails in hierarchies of topics or systematize a large body of biological knowledge in hierarchies of concepts (aka ontologies). Such organization allows to focus on a speciﬁc level of details ignoring specialization of lower levels and generalization of upper levels.
Hierarchical categorization is an automatic approach of placing new items into a collection with a predeﬁned hierarchical structure. In this work we focus mainly on one application area, hierarchical text categorization. However, the proposed techniques can be applied to automatic hierarchical categorization of entities of any kind. Hierarchical text categorization has many important real-world applications. In fact, most of the large textual collections are organized hierarchically, e.g. web repositories, digital libraries, patent libraries, email folders, etc. Dealing
L. Lamontagne and M. Marchand (Eds.): Canadian AI 2006, LNAI 4013, pp. 397–408, 2006. c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

398 S. Kiritchenko et al.
with hierarchies eﬀectively and eﬃciently is becoming a necessity in many text categorization applications.
Theoretically, hierarchical categorization can be easily substituted with “ﬂat” categorization if we ignore the class structure and replace a hierarchy with a set of categories. However, by doing this we would disregard relevant information. For most text categorization tasks the category hierarchies have been carefully composed by humans and represent our knowledge on the subject matter. This additional information can boost the performance of a classiﬁcation system if we ﬁnd the way to incorporate it in the learning process.
In this work we explore two main aspects of hierarchical text categorization: learning algorithms and performance evaluation. First, we introduce the notion of consistent hierarchical classiﬁcation that makes classiﬁcation results even more comprehensible. In consistent classiﬁcation any category label is assigned together with all its ancestor labels to any instance. Among the previously introduced hierarchical learning algorithms, only a local top-down approach produces consistent classiﬁcation. We propose a new global hierarchical approach that is aimed to perform consistent classiﬁcation. This is a general framework of converting a conventional “ﬂat” learning algorithm into a hierarchical one. In our experiments we used AdaBoost as the underlying learning approach. However, any conventional method capable of performing multi-label classiﬁcation can be used within this framework. Our experiments on real and synthetic data indicate that the proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the corresponding “ﬂat” approach as well as the local top-down method. In addition, we design a new hierarchical evaluation measure. We argue that conventional “ﬂat” measures as well as the existing hierarchical measures cannot discriminate between diﬀerent types of errors a hierarchical classiﬁcation system can make. Therefore, we propose a new hierarchical evaluation measure that is simple and straight-forward to compute, gives credit to partially correct classiﬁcation and has much discriminating power.
2 Related Work
Until the mid-1990s machine learning researchers mostly ignored the hierarchical category structure present in some text categorization applications by turning a hierarchy into a ﬂat set of categories. In 1997 Koller and Sahami carried out the ﬁrst proper study of a hierarchical text categorization problem [1]. They presented a divide-and-conquer (aka local) principle, the most intuitive for hierarchical text categorization. After this work a number of approaches to hierarchical text categorization have been proposed [2, 3, 4].
Hierarchical categorization methods can be divided in two types [3]: global (or big-bang) and local (or top-down level-based). In a global approach only one classiﬁer is built to discriminate all categories in a hierarchy simultaneously. It is similar to the “ﬂat” approach except it somehow takes into account the relationships between the categories in a hierarchy. Hierarchical modiﬁcations to association rule learning [5], decision tree learning [6], SVM [7] and probabilistic learning [8] are considered global approaches.

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies 399
A local approach builds separate classiﬁers for each internal node of a hierarchy. A local classiﬁer usually proceeds in a top-down fashion ﬁrst picking the most relevant categories of the top level and then recursively making the choice among the low-level categories, children of the relevant top-level categories. The local approach has been widely used with diﬀerent learning algorithms: probabilistic learning [1], neural networks [4], and SVM [2].
Unlike previous work, we focus on hierarchical learning methods that build classiﬁers consistent with a given class hierarchy. The local approach naturally produces consistent labeling since we classify an instance into a category only if we have already classiﬁed it into the parent category in the previous classiﬁcation step. However, a local classiﬁer works only with limited (local) information at each classiﬁcation node. Moreover, it is highly sensitive to the decisions made at the top of a hierarchy: once an error is committed near the top, it cannot be recovered regardless of how good the classiﬁers are at lower levels. A global approach, on the other hand, uses all available information at the same time and, therefore, has a better chance for correct classiﬁcation. Finally, in many real-life situations, one classiﬁer produced by a global approach is easier to maintain and to interpret by end users than a bunch of classiﬁers built by a local method. For these reasons, we propose a new global approach speciﬁcally designed to produce consistent classiﬁcation.
3 Hierarchical Categorization Task
In this section we formally deﬁne a hierarchical classiﬁcation task. We start with a deﬁnition for partial ordering, a relation present in a hierarchical structure.
Deﬁnition 1 (Poset). A ﬁnite partially ordered set (poset) is a structure H = C, ≤ , where C is a ﬁnite set and ≤ ⊆ C × C is a reﬂexive, anti-symmetric, transitive binary relation on C.
Given a relation ≤, we deﬁne a relation < as q < p if q ≤ p and q = p. For any two categories p, q ∈ C such that q < p and ∃r ∈ C : q < r < p, we call p a parent category of q and q a child category of p. For any category p ∈ C, its ancestor set is Ancestors(p) = {q ∈ C : q ≥ p}, and its oﬀspring set is Of f spring(p) = {q ∈ C : q ≤ p} (note that both sets include category p). We call categories that have no children leaves and categories that have both parents and children intermediate (or internal) classes.
Deﬁnition 2 (Hierarchical Categorization). Hierarchical categorization task is the task of assigning a Boolean value to each pair dj, ci ∈ D × C, where D is a domain of instances and C = c1, . . . , c|C| is a set of predeﬁned categories with a given poset structure H = C, ≤ .
In a hierarchical categorization task the category hierarchy H = C, ≤ describes the relations between the categories and comes from the application task at hand. The hierarchy is assumed to represent the domain knowledge and is not modiﬁed in any way.

400 S. Kiritchenko et al.

In general, a hierarchical categorization task is multi-label which means that

an instance can be assigned to any number of categories from 0 to |C|.

For any poset H = C, ≤ that represents a hierarchy we assume the existence

of the root (or top) class Root(H) that is the ancestor of all other categories in

the hierarchy: {Root(H)} = parents.

p∈C Ancestors(p). The root class itself has no

Generally, category hierarchies are of a broader-narrower type where a subcat-

egory represents a subtype or a part of the parent category. Category hierarchies

are usually represented in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG). DAGs

are more general than trees in that nodes in a DAG can have multiple parents.

4 Hierarchical Consistency
The notion of hierarchical consistency is intended to make the results of hierarchical classiﬁcation more comprehensible for users. Since hierarchies are mostly designed in the way that lower level categories are specialization of higher level categories, which is represented by transitive relations, such as “is-a” and “partof”, we can assume that an instance belonging to a category also belongs to all ancestor nodes of that category. Therefore, we would like a classiﬁer explicitly assign all the relevant labels, including the ancestor labels, to a given instance. In this way, the assigned labels would clearly indicate the position of an instance in a category hierarchy.
Deﬁnition 3 (Hierarchical Consistency). A label set Ci ⊆ C assigned to an instance di ∈ D is called consistent with a given hierarchy if Ci includes complete ancestor sets for every label ck ∈ Ci, i.e. if ck ∈ Ci and cj ∈ Ancestors(ck), then cj ∈ Ci.
We assume that every instance belongs to the root of a class hierarchy; therefore, from now on we will always exclude the root node from any ancestor set since including it does not provide any additional information on the instance.
Deﬁnition 4 (Hierarchical Consistency Requirement). Any label assignments produced by a hierarchical classiﬁcation system on a given hierarchical categorization task should be consistent with a corresponding class hierarchy.

5 Hierarchical Global Learning Algorithm
We propose a new hierarchical global approach to learn a classiﬁer that produces consistent labeling on unseen instances. The method is simple and eﬀective and can be applied to any categorization task with a class hierarchy represented as a DAG. The main idea of the algorithm is to transform an initial (possibly singlelabel) task into a multi-label task by expanding the label set of each training example with the corresponding ancestor labels or, in other words, by expanding intermediate classes with examples from their oﬀspring nodes. As a result,

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies 401
in the modiﬁed dataset each intermediate category would contain training examples originally assigned to this category and examples originally assigned to descendant nodes of the category in a hierarchical graph. This data modiﬁcation forces a learning algorithm to focus on high level categories by providing a large number of training examples for those categories. The correct classiﬁcation of unseen instances into high level categories is very important in hierarchical categorization since high level categories deﬁne the most general topics for documents. For example, if we classify a news article about an art exhibition into category “sports” (if “arts” and “sports” are among the top level categories), it would be completely wrong. On the other hand, a mistake made for lower levels, e.g. classiﬁcation of a document on minor hockey into category “professional hockey”, would not be so drastic.
We expect the presented strategy to be successful in the hierarchical settings because a hierarchical structure is typically designed to reﬂect the semantic closeness of categories. Therefore, we anticipate that related categories share some attributes. In the text categorization context, that means shared vocabulary. For example, categories “hockey” and “American football” have their own speciﬁc vocabulary, such as “goalkeeper” or “NHL” for “hockey” and “Super Bowl” or “touchdown” for “football”. At the same time, these two categories likely share some common terms, such as “team” or “game”, that also appear in their parent category “sports”. Our method allows a learning algorithm to explore such common attributes in order to improve classiﬁcation, especially for high level categories.
Overall, the algorithm consists of three steps:
1. Transformation of training data making them consistent with a given class hierarchy;
2. Application of a regular learning algorithm on a multi-label dataset; 3. Re-labeling of inconsistently classiﬁed test instances.
On the ﬁrst step, we replace each example (di, Ci), di ∈ D, Ci ⊆ C, with (di, Cˆi), where Cˆi = { ck∈Ci Ancestors(ck)}. Then, we apply a regular learning algorithm, e.g. AdaBoost, on the modiﬁed multi-label dataset. Since we train a classiﬁer on the consistent data, we expect that most test instances would be classiﬁed consistently as well. However, it is not guaranteed. Some of the test instances can end up with inconsistent labels. This happens if the conﬁdence score of some class A passes a given threshold while the conﬁdence score of one of its ancestor classes does not. For such instances we need to do the third postprocessing step. At this step we re-label the instances in a consistent manner by considering the conﬁdence in the predictions for class A and all its ancestor classes. One possible procedure here is to calculate the average of these conﬁdences. If the average is greater than a threshold, we label the instance with class A and all its ancestor classes; if the average is lower than the threshold, we do not assign class A to the instance. This procedure acts as a kind of weighted voting. Each ancestor class votes with its own conﬁdence score. Large positive scores would indicate some certainty in the assigning the class, while negative values would vote against this class assignment.

402 S. Kiritchenko et al.
5.1 Hierarchical AdaBoost
In this work we use the new hierarchical global approach with a state-of-the-art learning algorithm AdaBoost.MH [9],1 a boosting method designed for multiclass multi-label problems.
AdaBoost.MH works iteratively at each iteration t learning a new “weak” hypothesis ht on a current distribution Pt over the training examples. After each step, the distribution Pt is modiﬁed to increase the weight of the incorrectly classiﬁed training examples and decrease the weight of the correctly classiﬁed examples. As a result, on the next round t + 1 a “weak” learner ht+1 is forced to focus on examples that are hardest to classify. After a speciﬁed number of iterations T , the learning process is stopped, and a weighted voting of the “weak” predictions is used as a ﬁnal hypothesis: H(d, ℓ) = t=1 T αtht(d, ℓ), d ∈ D, ℓ ∈ C, where D is a domain of documents and C is a set of categories. In other words, for each test instance and each class the ﬁnal hypothesis outputs a real value, called a conﬁdence score. For single-label classiﬁcation, the classiﬁcation decision is simply the top-ranked class, the class with the highest conﬁdence score. In a multi-label case, however, we have to select a threshold to cut oﬀ class labels for a given instance. One such possible threshold is zero: any positive conﬁdence score indicates that the class should be assigned to an instance, any negative score indicates that the class should not be assigned to an instance. However, we can optimize this threshold value with a simple procedure deﬁned as follows. We train AdaBoost.MH on an available training set S, get the conﬁdence predictions on the same set S, and sort the conﬁdence scores in the decreasing order (t1, t2, . . ., tn). Then, we try the conﬁdence scores one by one as possible thresholds and ﬁnd tk that results in the best F-measure on the training set S. The ﬁnal threshold to use on test data is calculated as tk+tk+1 2 . This threshold smoothing helps us avoid overﬁtting when the boosting progresses and gains high conﬁdence in prediction.
6 Hierarchical Evaluation Measure
Most researchers evaluate hierarchical classiﬁcation systems based on standard “ﬂat” measures: accuracy/error and precision/recall. However, these measures are not suitable for hierarchical categorization since they do not diﬀerentiate among diﬀerent kinds of misclassiﬁcation errors. Intuitively, misclassiﬁcation to a sibling or a parent node of the correct category is much better than misclassiﬁcation to a distant node. To overcome this problem, a hierarchical measure based on the notion of distance has been proposed. The distance between a correct and assigned category, distance(x, y), is the length of the (unique) undirected path from node x to node y in a hierarchical tree. This distance measure gives diﬀerent
1 In our experiments we used software BoosTexter (http://www.cs.princeton.edu/ ∼schapire/BoosTexter/), an implementation of AdaBoost.MH speciﬁcally designed for text categorization. BoosTexter uses decision stumps (one-level decision trees) as its “weak” learners.

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies 403

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

Fig. 1. A sample DAG class hierarchy. The solid ellipse G represents the real category of an instance.

penalties to misclassiﬁcation into a neighboring or a distant category. However, it has some drawbacks. First, it is not easily extendable to DAG hierarchies (where multiple paths between two categories can exist) and multi-label tasks. Second, it does not change with depth. Misclassiﬁcation into a sibling category of a top level node and misclassiﬁcation into a sibling of a node 10-level deep are considered the same type of error (distance of 2). However, an error at the 10th level seems a lot less harmful than an error at the top level.
To express the desired properties of a hierarchical evaluation measure, we formulate the following requirements:

1. The measure gives credit to partially correct classiﬁcation, e.g. misclassiﬁcation into node I when the correct category is G (Figure 1) should be penalized less than misclassiﬁcation into node D since I is in the same subgraph as G and D is not.
2. The measure punishes distant errors more heavily: a) the measure gives higher evaluation for correctly classifying one level down comparing to staying at the parent node, e.g. classiﬁcation into node E is better than classiﬁcation into its parent C since E is closer to the correct category G; b) the measure gives lower evaluation for incorrectly classifying one level down comparing to staying at the parent node, e.g. classiﬁcation into node F is worse than classiﬁcation into its parent C since F is farther away from G. 3. The measure punishes errors at higher levels of a hierarchy more heavily, e.g. misclassiﬁcation into node I when the correct category is its sibling G is less severe than misclassiﬁcation into node C when the correct category is its sibling A.

Formally, if we denote HM (c1|c2) the hierarchical evaluation of classifying an instance d ∈ D into class c1 ∈ C when the correct class is c2 ∈ C in a given tree hierarchy H = C, ≤ , then

1. for any instance (d, c0) ∈ D × C, if Ancestors(c1) ∩ Ancestors(c0) = ⊘ and

Ancestors(c2) ∩ Ancestors(c0) = ⊘, then HM (c1|c0) > HM (c2|c0);

2. a) for any instance (d, c0) ∈ D × C, if c1 = P arent(c2) and

distance(c1, c0) > distance(c2, c0), then HM (c1|c0) < HM (c2|c0);

b) for any instance (d, c0) ∈ D × C, if c1 = P arent(c2) and

distance(c1, c0) < distance(c2, c0), then HM (c1|c0) > HM (c2|c0);

3. for any instances (d1, c1) ∈ D ×C and (d2, c2) ∈ D ×C, if distance(c1, c′1) =

di

s

t

a

nc

e

(c

2

,

c

′ 2

),

level(c1)

=

level(c2)

+

Δ,

level(c′1)

=

level(c′2)

+

Δ,

Δ

>

0,

404 S. Kiritchenko et al.

c1 = c′1, c2 = c′2, and level(x) is the length of the unique path from the root to node x, then HM (c′1|c1) > HM (c′2|c2).

Clearly, conventional “ﬂat” measures do not satisfy any of the three require-

ments. Distance-based hierarchical measures satisfy the second principle, but

not always the ﬁrst and not the third. Thus, we propose a new hierarchical eval-

uation measure that satisﬁes all three principles. The new measure is the pair

precision and recall with the following addition: each example belongs not only

to its class, but also to all ancestors of the class in a hierarchical graph, except

the root (we exclude the root of a class hierarchy, since all examples belong to

the root by default). We call the new measures hP (hierarchical precision) and

hR (hierarchical recall).

Formally, in the multi-label settings, for any instance (di, Ci), d ∈ D, Ci ⊆ C

classiﬁed

into

subset

C′
i

⊆

C

we

extend

sets

Ci

and

C′
i

with

the

corresponding

ancestor labels: Cˆi = {

ck∈Ci Ancestors(ck)},

Cˆ′
i

=

{

cl∈C′ Ancestors(cl)}.

i

Then, we calculate (micro-averaged) hP and hR as follows:

È
i

|Cˆi

∩Cˆ′i

|

È
i

|Cˆi

∩Cˆ′i

|

hP = È |Cˆ′|

hR = È |Cˆi|

ii

i

For example, suppose an instance is classiﬁed into class F while it really

belongs to class G (Figure 1). To calculate our hierarchical measure, we extend the set of real classes Ci = {G} with all ancestors of class G: Cˆi = {B, C, E, G}.

We

also

extend

the

set

of

predicted

classes

C′
i

=

{F

}

with

all

ancestors

of

class

F

:

Cˆ′
i

=

{C, F }.

So,

class

C

is

the

only

correctly

assigned

label

from

the

extended

set: |Cˆi ∩ Cˆi′| = 1. There are |Cˆi′| = 2 assigned labels and |Cˆi| = 4 real classes.

|Cˆi∩Cˆi′| 1

|Cˆi∩Cˆi′| 1

Therefore, we get hP = |Cˆ′| = 2 and hR = |Cˆ | = 4 .
i

i

Following the common practice in conventional text categorization, we can

combine the two values hP and hR into one hF-measure:

(β2 + 1) · hP · hR

hFβ = 2

, β ∈ [0, +∞)

(β · hP + hR)

In our experiments we used β = 1, giving precision and recall equal weights.

Theorem 1. The new hierarchical measure hF satisﬁes all three requirements for hierarchical evaluation measures listed above2.

The new measure is easy to compute: it is based solely on a given hierarchy, so no parameter tuning is required. It is formulated for a general case of multi-label classiﬁcation with a DAG class hierarchy. Furthermore, we have experimentally proved (results not shown here) that the new measure is superior to standard “ﬂat” measures in terms of statistical consistency and discriminancy - the two criteria Huang and Ling propose to compare classiﬁcation performance measures [10]. The consistency property means that if we have two classiﬁers A and B
2 The proof of the theorem is straight-forward and is available at http://www. site.uottawa.ca/∼svkir/papers/thesis.zip.

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies 405
and A is more accurate in terms of non-hierarchical measures, it is most likely that our hierarchical measure agrees, and A is better than B in terms of hF as well. The discriminancy property implies that if non-hierarchical measures cannot tell apart the performances of classiﬁers A and B, our measure is more discriminating and prefers one over the other in most situations.
7 Experiments
We report the results of the experiments on real and synthetic data to compare the proposed hierarchical global approach with “ﬂat” and hierarchical local methods.
7.1 Datasets
Synthetic. We make use of synthetic data to be able to control the size of a class hierarchy and the presence or absence of attribute inheritance between an ancestor class and its descendant classes. The data are designed as follows. For a speciﬁed number of levels and for a speciﬁed out-degree, i.e. the number of children classes for each intermediate category, we build a balanced tree hierarchy. For each class, including the internal ones, we allocate 3 binary attributes and generate 10 training and 5 test instances per class. Each instance is assigned to exactly one class. The instances are generated randomly according to the following distribution: attributes associated with the class of an instance are set to 1 with 70% probability, all other attributes are set to 1 with 20% probability. We test synthetic data for two extreme situations. The ﬁrst one is when each class inherits the distribution of attributes from its parent class on top of its own distribution. In other words, the attributes for a class and all its ancestor classes have the high probability (70%) of 1; all other attributes have the small probability (20%). The second situation is when there is no inheritance of attribute distribution: only the attributes associated with the class of an instance have 70% probability of 1, all others have 20% probability. We ran experiments for hierarchies with the number of levels and out-degree each ranging from 2 to 5. Experiments are repeated 100 times for every conﬁguration.
20 newsgroups. This is a widely used dataset of Usenet postings. Following [8], we use a two-level tree hierarchy grouping 15 categories in 5 parent nodes.
RCV1 V2. This is a cleaned version of a new benchmark collection of Reuters news articles. The dataset consists of over 800,000 documents labeled with 103 topics comprising a 4-level hierarchy. Due to the large size of the corpus, we are able to split the data in training and testing subsets in a time-sensitive manner. Articles from 10 full months (September, 1996 - June, 1997) form 10 splits: the ﬁrst half of a month is used for training, while the second half is used for testing.
Medline. We have also composed 3 large-scale biological datasets for a task of predicting gene functions from biomedical literature. We chose Gene Ontology (GO) to be our category hierarchy. GO provides a hierarchically organized set

406 S. Kiritchenko et al.
of all possible functions that a gene can have in a living organism. It consists of 3 parts: biological process (P), molecular function (F), and cellular component (C). Each part can be seen as an independent DAG hierarchy. We use the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) to obtain manually assigned pairs of a biomedical article describing a yeast gene and the gene’s function in GO terms. Overall, we collect 3 datasets, one for each GO hierarchy.
For real datasets, the conventional “bag-of-words” representation is used. All documents are pre-processed: stop words are removed, remaining words are stemmed and converted into binary attributes (a stem is present or not). A simple feature selection technique based on document frequencies is applied. Experiments are run on 10 random training/test splits (in proportion 2:1) for each dataset, except for RCV1 V2 where splits are time-sensitive.
7.2 Comparison with “Flat” AdaBoost
The ﬁrst set of experiments compares the performance of hierarchical global AdaBoost with the corresponding “ﬂat” approach, i.e. standard AdaBoost that does not take into account any hierarchical information. Both algorithms are run for equal numbers of iterations. The results are presented in Table 1 (columns 5, 7). Evidently, hierarchical AdaBoost signiﬁcantly outperforms its “ﬂat” version. The diﬀerences are more pronounced for larger hierarchies with attribute distribution inheritance as expected. The main diﬀerence between the two algorithms is the initial re-labeling that makes training data consistent with a class hierarchy. In really hard tasks, e.g. on the biological data, where the number of classes is very large and the number of training instances per class is very small, the “ﬂat” algorithm suﬀers a lot producing very poor results. At the same time, this additional step allows the hierarchical method to assemble more training data and learn more accurate classiﬁers for high level categories, which are favored by the hierarchical evaluation measure.
7.3 Comparison with Hierarchical Local Approach
In the second set of experiments we compare the performances of the hierarchical global and hierarchical local approaches using AdaBoost as the underlying learning algorithm. In the hierarchical local approach we run AdaBoost at each internal node of a hierarchy for the same number of iterations as the global hierarchical AdaBoost. Table 1 (columns 6, 7) shows the results. For most synthetic and real tasks the global approach outperforms the local method. Both algorithms take advantage of extended training data. However, the global approach explores all the categories simultaneously (in a global fashion) assigning only labels with high conﬁdence scores. The local method, on the other hand, uses only local information and, therefore, is forced to make classiﬁcation decisions at each internal node of a hierarchy, in general, pushing most instances deep down. As a result, the global algorithm is always superior to the local one in terms of precision while slightly yielding in recall. This reﬂects the conservative nature of the global approach comparing to the local one. Therefore, it should be the method of choice for tasks where precision is the key measure of success. We

Learning and Evaluation in the Presence of Class Hierarchies 407

Table 1. Comparison of “ﬂat”, hierarchical local, and hierarchical global AdaBoost. Numbers in bold are signiﬁcantly better with 99% conﬁdence.

dataset newsgroups RCV1 V2 medline P medline F medline C synthetic (with attr. inheritance)
synthetic (no attr. inheritance)

# of categories
20 103 1025 1078 331
6 14 30 62 12 39 120 20 84 30
6 14 30 62 12 39 120 20 84 30

depth
2 4 12 10 8
2 3 4 5 2 3 4 2 3 2
2 3 4 5 2 3 4 2 3 2

outdegree
3 4.68 5.41 10.29 6.45
2 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 5
2 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 5

boost. iter. 500 500 500 500 500
200 500 1000 2000 400 1000 3500 600 2500 900
200 500 1000 2000 400 1000 3500 600 2500 900

hF1 measure “ﬂat” local global 75.51 80.01 79.26 73.10 74.03 75.86 15.32 59.27 59.25
8.78 43.36 38.17 42.81 72.07 73.35

68.30 58.35 44.90 20.88 53.47 29.51 2.67 41.35 6.98 29.99

73.42 69.40 68.18 68.44 61.99 58.81 57.40 54.26 50.66 47.26

76.22 74.21 73.22 72.70 63.45 60.69 58.22 55.25 50.70 47.87

61.69 42.47 24.49 8.45 41.53 14.50 0.79 26.72 2.46 17.14

59.83 44.00 33.44 26.03 43.87 26.33 17.97 32.51 17.96 26.04

65.95 51.53 40.18 32.61 48.02 29.97 21.91 35.01 19.70 27.12

can also notice that an increase in out-degree (k) adds a signiﬁcant number of categories (∼ kdepth−1) to the global method while only slightly (linearly) complicating the task for the local method. This results in the smaller advantage of global AdaBoost on synthetic hierarchies with large out-degrees and its loss on the highly “bushy” “medline F” data.
8 Conclusion
In this paper we study a hierarchical categorization problem. We show that hierarchical classiﬁcation should be consistent with a class hierarchy to fully reproduce the semantics of hierarchical relations. We discuss performance measures for hierarchical classiﬁcation and introduce natural, desired properties that these measures ought to satisfy. We deﬁne a novel hierarchical evaluation measure and show that, unlike the conventional “ﬂat” as well as the existing hierarchical measures, the new measure satisﬁes the desired properties. It is also simple, requires

408 S. Kiritchenko et al.
no parameter tuning, and has much discriminating power. We present a novel hierarchical global algorithm that produces consistent classiﬁcation. This algorithm with AdaBoost as the underlying learning procedure signiﬁcantly outperforms the corresponding “ﬂat” approach, i.e. the approach that does not take into account the hierarchical information. The proposed algorithm also outperforms the hierarchical local top-down approach on many synthetic and real tasks.
In future work, we plan to perform similar experiments with other multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms as underlying learning components. Unlike AdaBoost.MH, some algorithms may be found behaving consistently in the hierarchical framework even without the post-processing step.
Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), National Research Council of Canada (NRC), and the Ontario Centres of Excellence (OCE).
References
1. Koller, D., Sahami, M.: Hierarchically Classifying Documents Using Very Few Words. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). (1997) 170–178
2. Dumais, S., Chen, H.: Hierarchical Classiﬁcation of Web Content. In: Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR). (2000) 256–263
3. Sun, A., Lim, E.P.: Hierarchical Text Classiﬁcation and Evaluation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). (2001) 521–528
4. Ruiz, M., Srinivasan, P.: Hierarchical Text Categorization Using Neural Networks. Information Retrieval 5 (2002) 87–118
5. Wang, K., Zhou, S., He, Y.: Hierarchical Classiﬁcation of Real Life Documents. In: Proceedings of the SIAM International Conference on Data Mining. (2001)
6. Blockeel, H., Bruynooghe, M., Dzeroski, S., Ramon, J., Struyf, J.: Hierarchical Multi-Classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the SIGKDD Workshop on MultiRelational Data Mining (MRDM). (2002) 21–35
7. Tsochantaridis, I., Hofmann, T., Joachims, T., Altun, Y.: Support Vector Machine Learning for Interdependent and Structured Output Spaces. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). (2004)
8. McCallum, A., Rosenfeld, R., Mitchell, T., Ng, A.: Improving Text Classiﬁcation by Shrinkage in a Hierarchy of Classes. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). (1998) 359–367
9. Schapire, R., Singer, Y.: Improved Boosting Algorithms Using Conﬁdence-rated Predictions. Machine Learning 37 (1999) 297–336
10. Huang, J., Ling, C.: Using AUC and Accuracy in Evaluating Learning Algorithms. IEEE Trans. on Data and Knowledge Engineering 17(3) (2005) 299–310
View publication stats

