Article
A review of instrumental variable estimators for Mendelian randomization
Stephen Burgess,1 Dylan S Small2 and Simon G Thompson1

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 2017, Vol. 26(5) 2333–2355 ! The Author(s) 2015 Reprints and permissions: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/0962280215597579 journals.sagepub.com/home/smm

Abstract Instrumental variable analysis is an approach for obtaining causal inferences on the effect of an exposure (risk factor) on an outcome from observational data. It has gained in popularity over the past decade with the use of genetic variants as instrumental variables, known as Mendelian randomization. An instrumental variable is associated with the exposure, but not associated with any confounder of the exposure–outcome association, nor is there any causal pathway from the instrumental variable to the outcome other than via the exposure. Under the assumption that a single instrumental variable or a set of instrumental variables for the exposure is available, the causal effect of the exposure on the outcome can be estimated. There are several methods available for instrumental variable estimation; we consider the ratio method, two-stage methods, likelihood-based methods, and semi-parametric methods. Techniques for obtaining statistical inferences and confidence intervals are presented. The statistical properties of estimates from these methods are compared, and practical advice is given about choosing a suitable analysis method. In particular, bias and coverage properties of estimators are considered, especially with weak instruments. Settings particularly relevant to Mendelian randomization are prioritized in the paper, notably the scenario of a continuous exposure and a continuous or binary outcome.
Keywords Instrumental variable, comparison of methods, causal inference, weak instruments, finite-sample bias, Mendelian randomization

1 Introduction
Instrumental variable analysis is the exploitation of a natural experiment to obtain causal inferences in an observational setting. An instrumental variable is a factor that is correlated with the exposure (usually a putative causal risk factor), but is not associated with any confounder of the exposure–outcome association, nor is there any pathway by which the instrumental variable can inﬂuence the outcome other than via the exposure of interest.1,2 Usually, an instrumental variable is in some way external to the relationship between the exposure and outcome and formally must be exogenous to the statistical model relating the exposure to the outcome (that is, not associated with the error term in the equation).3 A natural experiment is analogous to a randomized trial, except that the value of the exposure is inﬂuenced by nature rather than by an investigator on the basis of randomized allocation.4
A source of potential instrumental variables is genetic variants.5 A genetic variant is a section of genetic code that diﬀers between individuals. Genetic variants are good candidate instrumental variables: the function of many genes is known and well characterized; genetic variants are ﬁxed at conception, and so do not change due to environmental factors, thus avoiding reverse causation; and genetic variants are generally inherited independently, meaning that they tend to be speciﬁc in their associations. The use of genetic variants as instrumental variables in observational data has been termed ‘Mendelian randomization’.6,7
1Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA
Corresponding author: Stephen Burgess, Strangeways Research Laboratory, 2 Worts Causeway, Cambridge, CB1 8RN, UK. Email: sb452@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

2334

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

Many reviews exist on the use of instrumental variables, in particular on the assumptions necessary to be an instrumental variable,8,9 assessing the validity of instrumental variables,10 assumptions necessary for estimation of a causal eﬀect parameter using instrumental variables,11–13 methods for eﬀect estimation with multiple instrumental variables,14 with binary outcomes,15,16 methods for the estimation of odds ratios,17 and guidelines for the reporting of instrumental variable analysis.18 We seek to complement this literature by contributing a review to compare methods for instrumental variable analysis, with accompanying practical guidelines on their use. This review will focus on methodological issues that are particularly relevant to Mendelian randomization: the scenario of a continuous exposure and a continuous or binary outcome; statistical inference and the construction of conﬁdence intervals; and the use of multiple instruments, in particular multiple weak instruments. A ‘weak instrument’ is an instrumental variable that explains a relatively small proportion of variance in the exposure.19 Although these are issues particularly germane to Mendelian randomization, they are also relevant to instrumental variable analyses in other contexts.
After framing the typical context of a Mendelian randomization investigation that we assume to hold (Section 2), we proceed to consider in turn the ratio of coeﬃcients method (Section 3), two-stage methods (Section 4), likelihood-based methods (Section 5), and semi-parametric methods (Section 6). This order corresponds roughly to the complexity of the methods, with the simplest ones ﬁrst. This is not an exhaustive list of methods that have been proposed for instrumental variable analysis, but it covers a wide range of commonly used methods. The methods are contrasted in terms of bias, coverage, eﬃciency, robustness to misspeciﬁcation, and the existence of ﬁnite moments. We outline the problem of weak instruments and present a comparison of estimates from methods with weak instruments (Section 7). We also introduce a score-based (or ‘allele score’) approach to instrumental variable estimation, conceived for use with multiple weak instruments. We conclude by discussing methodological issues relating to the eﬃciency and validity of instrumental variable analyses, and to the use of instrumental variable methods in practice (Section 8).

2 Context of the problem
We assume that individual-level data are available from a single data source on an exposure X, an outcome Y, and an instrumental variable (IV) Z, or set of IVs Z1, Z2, . . ., ZK. Usually the outcome is disease, although there is no methodological restriction as to what outcomes can be considered. The exposure is a putative causal risk factor for the outcome and is assumed to be continuous. A binary exposure is common for IV estimation in the context of a randomized trial to estimate the causal eﬀect of treatment, where the IV is randomization.20 In this case, randomization typically has a large eﬀect on the treatment received for a subgroup of individuals known as the compliers.21 However, in Mendelian randomization, the exposure is almost always continuous, and genetic variants typically have small eﬀects on the exposure that are thought to aﬀect all individuals in the population. Although it is possible to consider a dichotomized risk factor as an exposure (such as presence of hypertension in the case of blood pressure), a valid IV for the continuous exposure is not generally a valid IV for the dichotomized exposure, as there is an alternative causal pathway from the IV to the outcome via the true value of the continuous exposure.10

2.1 Genetic variants used in Mendelian randomization
We here provide a simplistic introduction to genetics with the aim of explaining the format of genetic data used in applied Mendelian randomization investigations; more detailed information on genetics for Mendelian randomization can be found in other papers.5,6,22
Genetic variants used as IVs in Mendelian randomization are usually single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). A SNP is a variation at a single position of the DNA sequence in some individuals in a population, where the DNA sequence has one letter replaced with another letter. The diﬀerent possible letters that may appear at this position are known as alleles. Most SNPs are diallelic, having two alleles: one that is more common, known as the wild-type or major allele, and the other known as the variant or minor allele. For each individual, a SNP can be represented as a random variable by the number of variant alleles; this can take the values 0, 1, or 2, because each individual has two copies of the DNA sequence (two chromosomes). In some cases, the SNP may be regarded as a dichotomous variable, taking values 0 and 1: either for statistical reasons, if the variant allele is rare so that only a very small number of individuals in the sample have two copies, or for biological reasons, if individuals with a single copy of the variant allele have similar average values of the exposure as those with zero copies (recessive model) or as those with two copies (dominant model). Alternatively, the IV may be a copy number variant (a

Burgess et al.

2335

repeated section of the DNA code where the number of copies of the section varies between individuals),23 or an allele score (Section 7.3); in these cases, the IV would be a discrete variable taking positive values or a continuous variable.

2.2 Causal estimand
It has been established that the core IV assumptions only identify bounds for the causal eﬀect rather than a single causal estimate.24,25 However, these bounds are extremely imprecise and even in large samples are rarely informative. We do not recommend their use in practical Mendelian randomization investigations. We here assume that the IV assumptions are satisﬁed; otherwise, even these bounds can be biased and highly misleading, particularly if the IVs are weak.26
With a binary exposure and a single IV, under the assumption of monotonicity in the eﬀect of the IV on the exposure, the causal estimand from an IV analysis is known as a local average treatment eﬀect27 or (in particular in the case of a binary IV) a complier-averaged causal eﬀect.28 It represents the average change in the outcome for a change in the exposure amongst those individuals whose value of the exposure is aﬀected by their value of the IV.11 Monotonicity means that the exposure for each individual would be increased (or alternatively for each individual would be decreased) or unchanged if that person had Z ¼ z1 compared to if they had Z ¼ z0 for all z1 4 z0. In the language of principal stratiﬁcation for randomized trials, this is equivalent to the assumption that there are no deﬁers.21 For genetic variants that have proven biological links with the risk factor, the monotonicity assumption is plausible, as such biological eﬀects seem likely to act in the same direction across all individuals. However, the monotonicity assumption is unlikely to hold if the IV is an allele score (Section 7.3), particularly if it is an unweighted or imprecisely weighted score. In any case, the monotonicity assumption is not testable from empirical data. If the monotonicity assumption is not satisﬁed, then the causal eﬀect of the exposure on the outcome can be estimated consistently if it is constant for all individuals across the population.29 A weaker version of this assumption, that of no modiﬁcation of the causal eﬀect across levels of the instrument within the treated, can be used to estimate the eﬀect of treatment in the treated.30
With a continuous exposure, to identify a causal parameter, it is necessary to make some parametric assumptions, for example homogeneity and linearity in the causal exposure–outcome association with no eﬀect modiﬁcation.9,12 The causal estimand is then the average change in the outcome for a unit change in the exposure. If there are multiple IVs, it is convenient to assume that the causal eﬀect of the exposure on the outcome is homogeneous, so that all the IVs identify the same causal quantity. However, this assumption is questionable, particularly if the genetic variants used as IVs aﬀect diﬀerent biological pathways and so aﬀect the value of the exposure in diﬀerent ways. This assumption is best addressed by a sensitivity analysis, comparing IV estimates based on diﬀerent subsets of IVs, particularly if the subsets correspond to groups of genetic variants with distinct biological functions, and can be tested formally by an overidentiﬁcation test (Section 8.3).
With a binary outcome, it is common in conventional observational studies to express the association of interest as a relative risk or an odds ratio, rather than as an average change in the outcome (which would represent an eﬀect on the risk diﬀerence scale). This is problematic in the case of an odds ratio, as the odds ratio is a noncollapsibility measure of association, meaning that its value depends on the distribution of risk factors in the population that aﬀect the outcome even if these variables are not confounders of the relationship between the exposure and outcome.31 It is therefore recommended that odds ratios should only be estimated in a case–control setting, as other measures of association are sensitive to case–control sampling. We return to the problem of deﬁning and estimating a causal odds ratio in the context of the individual IV methods.
In this paper, we presume that a causal eﬀect estimate is the desired outcome of a Mendelian randomization analysis. In many cases, testing for an association between an IV and the outcome, to assess the causal role of the exposure and the direction of the causal eﬀect without estimating a causal parameter, is suﬃcient.32 Such a test can be performed by a variety of methods, but most commonly using linear regression with a continuous outcome and using linear or logistic regression with a binary outcome. Although a causal estimate is likely to diﬀer from the eﬀect of a clinical intervention on the same exposure in practice,7 an eﬀect estimate may be desired, for instance, to give a quantitative indication of the importance of the exposure in relation to the outcome. We proceed to consider various methods for IV estimation in the context described above; however, deviations in many of these features (such as the availability of individual-level data, linearity of the causal eﬀect, homogeneity of the IV estimate from diﬀerent IVs) are addressed throughout the paper and in particular in the discussion.

2336

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

3 Ratio of coefficients method
The ratio of coeﬃcients method, or the Wald method,33 is the simplest way of estimating the causal eﬀect of the exposure (X) on the outcome (Y). The ratio method uses a single IV (Z); all other methods in this paper are able to include data on multiple IVs.

3.1 Continuous outcome

If the coeﬃcient of the IV in the regression of the exposure on the IV is written as ^XjZ and the coeﬃcient of the IV in the regression of the outcome on the IV is written as ^YjZ, then the ratio estimate of the causal eﬀect is

^YjZ

Ratio method estimate ¼

ð1Þ

^XjZ

Intuitively, we can think of the ratio method as saying that the change in the outcome for a unit increase in the exposure is equal to the change in the exposure for a unit increase in the IV, scaled by the change in the exposure for a unit increase in the IV. The causal estimate is usually expressed as the change in the outcome resulting from a unit change in the exposure, although changes in the outcome corresponding to diﬀerent magnitudes of change in the exposure could be quoted instead.
If the IV is dichotomous, taking values 0 and 1, then the ratio estimate simpliﬁes to
Ratio method estimate ðdichotomous IVÞ ¼ y"1 À y"0 ð2Þ x"1 À x"0
where y"1 is the average value of the outcome amongst those with an IV value of 1, and so on. If the eﬀect of the exposure on the outcome is assumed to be linear, then the ratio estimate is the causal eﬀect on the outcome of an exposure of xþ1 units versus an exposure of x units. If the eﬀect is not linear, then theoretical and empirical considerations have demonstrated that the ratio estimate approximates an average causal eﬀect of a population intervention in the exposure, for the population under analysis, with the assumption that the eﬀect of the IV on the exposure is constant in the population34 (Section 8.1).
We note that the ratio estimate can be calculated simply from the coeﬃcients ^XjZ and ^YjZ and as such only requires the availability of summarized data, not individual-level data, from the population. We return to consider IV estimation using summarized data in more detail in Section 8.6.

3.2 Binary outcome
Generally in epidemiological applications, disease is the outcome of interest. Disease outcomes are often dichotomous. We use the epidemiological terminology of referring to an individual with an outcome event as a case (Y¼1), and an individual with no event as a control (Y¼0).
With a binary outcome, the coeﬃcient ^YjZ in the ratio estimate (equation (1)) is again taken from regression of the outcome on the IV. The regression model used could in principle be linear, so that the IV estimate represents the change in the probability of an event for a unit change in the exposure. However, with a dichotomous outcome, log-linear or logistic regression models are generally preferred by epidemiologists, where the IV estimate represents the log relative risk or log odds ratio, respectively, for a unit change in the exposure. In a case–control setting, measures based on risk diﬀerences depend on the choice of the ratio of cases to controls, whereas odds ratios are invariant to outcome-dependent sampling. More generally, relative risks and odds ratios (which approximate relative risks under the rare disease assumption35) are based on multiplicative risk models, which may be more plausible than additive risk models, and are easier to communicate.36
With a dichotomous IV, the ratio estimate simpliﬁes as with a continuous outcome
Ratio method log relative risk ðor log odds ratioÞ estimate ðdichotomous IVÞ ¼ y"1 À y"0 ð3Þ x"1 À x"0

where y"j is the log of the probability of an event, or the log odds of an event, in IV subgroup j¼0,1.

Burgess et al.

2337

If the structural model relating the log of the probability of the outcome to the exposure is linear in the exposure with no eﬀect modiﬁcation, then the ratio estimate calculated using log-linear regression will be consistent for the causal log relative risk.12 The analogous consistency property does not hold in the case of a logistic-linear relationship between the probability of the outcome and the exposure, as the odds ratio is not a collapsible measure of association (see Section 4.2).

3.3 Case–control data
When case–control data are available, it is usual to make inferences on the IV-exposure association using only the controls.37 This makes the assumption that the association of the IV with the exposure in the controls is similar to that in the general population, which is true for a rare disease.38 This is necessary for two reasons. The ﬁrst is reverse causation, as measurements of the exposure in a retrospective setting may be distorted by a disease event. Second, over-recruitment of cases into the study means that the distribution of confounders in the case–control sample is diﬀerent to that in the general population. An association may be induced between the IV and the confounders, leading to possible bias in the IV estimate.9 This aﬀects not only the ratio method but all IV methods. The IV–outcome association estimate should not be aﬀected provided that logistic regression is used, as logistic regression estimates are invariant to outcome-dependent sampling. It is also necessary to assume that the probability of recruitment into the study is not dependent on the genetic variants used as IVs. For example, a genetic variant associated with increased mortality after an outcome event would appear to be protective rather than deleterious if the individuals who died were excluded from the study.
If the outcome is common and its prevalence in the population from which the case–control sample was taken is known, such as in a nested case–control study, then inferences on the IV–exposure association can be obtained using both cases and controls, provided that measurements of the exposure in cases were taken prior to the outcome event. This analysis can be performed by weighting the sample so that the proportions of cases and controls in the reweighted sample match those in the underlying population.38

3.4 Confidence intervals
Conﬁdence intervals for the ratio estimate can be calculated in several ways.

3.4.1 Normal approximation

The simplest way is to use a normal approximation. With a continuous outcome, standard errors and conﬁdence

intervals can be taken from the two-stage least squares method (see Section 4). Alternatively, the following

approximation can be used, based on the ﬁrst terms of the delta method expansion for the variance of a ratio

vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

Asymptotic standard

u u

2

useð^YjZÞ

^YjZ2 seð^XjZÞ2

2 ^YjZ covð^XjZ, ^YjZÞ

error of ratio estimate  ¼ t ^ 2  þ ^ 4  À ^ 3 ð4Þ

XjZ

XjZ

XjZ

If the numerator and denominator of the ratio estimator are uncorrelated, then the third term can be omitted; in any event, such correlation is unlikely to have a considerable impact on conﬁdence intervals.39
However, asymptotic normal approximations for the IV estimate may result in overly narrow conﬁdence
intervals, especially if the sample size is not large or the IV is weak (Section 7). This is because IV estimates are not normally distributed.19

3.4.2 Fieller’s theorem Alternatively, if the regression coeﬃcients in the ratio method ^YjZ and ^XjZ are assumed to be normally
distributed, critical values and conﬁdence intervals for the ratio estimator may be calculated using Fieller’s theorem.5,40 Fieller’s theorem gives conﬁdence intervals that have one of three possible forms41:

(i) The interval may be a closed interval [a,b], (ii) The interval may be the complement of a closed interval (À1,b][[a,1), and (iii) The interval may be unbounded.

2338

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

where a and b are functions of the association estimates ^YjZ and ^XjZ and their standard errors. Conﬁdence intervals from Fieller’s theorem may be preferred to those from an asymptotic normal approximation when the IV is weak.42 A tool to calculate conﬁdence intervals from Fieller’s theorem is available online (https:// sb452.shinyapps.io/ﬁeller).
3.4.3 Bootstrapping As an alternative approach, also applicable to any of the following methods, conﬁdence intervals can be calculated by bootstrapping.43 The simplest way of constructing a bootstrapped conﬁdence interval is by taking several random samples with replacement from the data of the same sample size. The empirical distribution of the IV estimator in the bootstrapped samples approximates the true distribution of the IV estimator.44 However, there are some concerns about the behaviour of bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals with weak instruments.45
3.4.4 Other approaches Alternative approaches for inference with weak instruments not discussed further here are conﬁdence intervals based on inverting a test statistic, such as the Anderson–Rubin test statistic46 or the conditional likelihood ratio test statistic.47 A variance estimator for a generalized empirical likelihood approach with good coverage properties has also been developed.48 These intervals give appropriate conﬁdence levels under the null hypothesis with weak instruments but may be underpowered with stronger instruments. However, unlike Fieller’s theorem, Anderson–Rubin and conditional likelihood ratio test conﬁdence intervals can be calculated based on multiple IVs. These methods have been discussed in detail elsewhere49,50 and implemented in Stata51 and R.52 We recommend the Fieller’s theorem, Anderson–Rubin, or conditional likelihood ratio approaches for obtaining causal inferences and conﬁdence intervals in practice with a weak instrument.

3.5 Absence of finite moments
One peculiar property of the ratio estimator is that its mean is not ﬁnite.53,54 This implies that, if you generated data on the exposure and outcome from a model with a valid IV and calculated the ratio estimate a large number of times, the mean value of these ratio estimates would become arbitrarily high (or low). This is due to the fact that there is a ﬁnite probability that the denominator in the ratio estimate (^XjZ) is very close to zero, leading to a large IV estimate. In practice, this is unlikely to be a serious issue since, if ^XjZ were close to zero, the IV would be considered invalid as the assumption that the IV is associated with the exposure would appear to be violated. Theoretically, the absence of a ﬁnite mean makes comparison of IV methods more diﬃcult, as the (mean) bias of the ratio estimate, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the mean of the IV estimator over its distribution and the true value of the causal eﬀect, cannot be calculated. We therefore additionally consider the median bias, the diﬀerence between the median of the IV estimator and the true causal eﬀect, when comparing diﬀerent methods for IV estimation.19

4 Two-stage methods
A two-stage method comprises two regression stages: the ﬁrst-stage regression of the exposure on the IVs, and the second-stage regression of the outcome on the ﬁtted values of the exposure from the ﬁrst stage. Both two-stage and likelihood-based methods (Section 5) make parametric assumptions for the identiﬁcation of causal eﬀects; this is contrasted with the weaker semi-parametric associations of the methods introduced in Section 6.

4.1 Continuous outcome – Two-stage least squares
With continuous outcomes and a linear model, the two-stage method is known as two-stage least squares (2SLS). It can be used with multiple IVs. In the ﬁrst-stage regression, the exposure (X) is regressed on the IV(s) (Z) to give ﬁtted values of the exposure (X^jZ). In the second-stage regression, the outcome (Y) is regressed on the ﬁtted values for the exposure (X^jZ) from the ﬁrst-stage regression. The causal estimate is this second-stage regression coeﬃcient for the change in the outcome caused by a unit change in the exposure.
With a single IV, the 2SLS estimate is the same as the ratio estimate. With multiple IVs, the 2SLS estimator may be viewed as a weighted average of the ratio estimates calculated using the instruments one at the time, where the weights are determined by the relative strengths of the instruments in the ﬁrst-stage regression.55

Burgess et al.

2339

Suppose we have K instrumental variables available. With data on individuals indexed by i ¼ 1, . . . , N who have

exposure xi, outcome yi and assuming an additive linear model for the IVs zik indexed by k ¼ 1, . . . , K, the ﬁrst-

stage regression model is

X

xi ¼ 0 þ kzik þ "Xi

ð5Þ

k

P The ﬁtted values x^i ¼ ^0 þ k ^kzik are then used in the second-stage regression model

yi ¼ 0 þ 1x^i þ "Yi

ð6Þ

where "Xi and "Yi are independent error terms. The causal parameter of interest is 1. If both models are estimated by standard least-squares regression, both the error terms are implicitly assumed to be homoscedastic and normally distributed.
Although estimation of the causal eﬀect in two stages (a sequential regression method) gives the correct point estimate, the standard error from the second-stage regression (equation (6)) is not correct.56(p. 188) This is because it does not take into account the uncertainty in the ﬁrst-stage regression. Under homoscedasticity of the error term in the equation

yi ¼ 0 þ 1xi þ "Yi0

ð7Þ

the asymptotic variance of the 2SLS estimator is

^2ðXTZðZTZÞÀ1ZTXÞÀ1 ¼ ^2ðX^TX^ÞÀ1

ð8Þ

where ^2 is an estimate of the variance of the residuals from equation (7), and Z is a N by K þ 1 matrix of the IVs
(including a constant term) and X is a N by 2 matrix of the risk factor and a constant term. Robust standard errors
are often used in practice, as estimates are sensitive to heteroscedasticity and misspeciﬁcation of the equations in
the second-stage model. However, in the continuous outcome case, consistent estimates are obtained even when the ﬁrst-stage model is misspeciﬁed.57
When all the associations are linear and the error terms normally distributed, the 2SLS estimator has a ﬁnite kth moment when there are at least (kþ1) IVs.53 Therefore, the mean of a 2SLS estimator is only deﬁned when
there are at least 2 IVs, and the variance is only deﬁned when there are at least 3 IVs. Unlike in an observational
analysis, in which estimates from conventional regression (ordinary least squares) are attenuated by measurement error in the exposure,58 the bias of eﬀect estimates from the 2SLS method (and consequently
from the ratio method amongst others) is not aﬀected by classical (non-diﬀerential) measurement error in the exposure.59

4.2 Binary outcome
The analogue of 2SLS with binary outcomes is a two-stage estimator where the second-stage (exposure–outcome) regression uses a log-linear or logistic regression model. These methods are implemented in order to estimate a causal relative risk or odds ratio parameter. They can be implemented using a sequential regression method by performing the two regression stages in turn. Estimates from such an approach will be overly precise, as uncertainty in the ﬁrst-stage regression is not accounted for; however, this over-precision may be slight if the standard error in the ﬁrst-stage coeﬃcients is low. This can be resolved by the use of a likelihood-based method (Section 5.3) or a bootstrap method.60
As with the ratio IV estimator, in a case–control study, it is important to undertake the ﬁrst-stage regression only in the controls, not the cases (Section 3.3). Fitted exposure values for the cases are obtained by substituting their IV values into the ﬁrst-stage regression model.

2340

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

Two-stage regression methods with non-linear second-stage regression models (such as logistic regression) have been criticized and called ‘forbidden regressions’.56(p. 190) This is because the non-linear model does not guarantee that the residuals from the second-stage regression are uncorrelated with the instruments.61 There is current debate
about the interpretation and validity of such estimates, especially when the measure of association is non-
collapsible.
A measure of association, such as an odds ratio or relative risk, is collapsible if, when it is constant across the
strata of the covariate, this constant value equals the value obtained from the overall (marginal) analysis. Noncollapsibility is the violation of this property.62 The relative risk and absolute risk diﬀerence are collapsible measures of association. Odds ratios are generally non-collapsible.63 An odds ratio estimated in an
observational study by conventional multivariable logistic regression is conditional on those covariates adjusted
for in the analysis. Unless adjustment is made (Section 8.2), an odds ratio estimated in an IV analysis is marginal
on these covariates. The odds ratio from a ratio or two-stage analysis method is conditional on the IV, but marginal in all other variables, including the exposure itself if it is continuous.64 This approximates a
population-averaged odds ratio from a randomized trial, where the intervention is to increase the exposure by one unit in all individuals across the population.42 A population-averaged odds ratio can be calculated as the
average odds in the population for one value of the exposure distribution divided by the average odds for another
value of the exposure distribution – for instance, the distribution of the exposure in the population increased
uniformly by one unit, and the original distribution of the exposure in the population.
Despite the consequences of non-collapsibility, the two-stage estimator with a logistic second-stage model still provides a valid test of the null hypothesis.17

4.3 Adjusted two-stage method

An adjusted two-stage method has been proposed, where the residuals from the ﬁrst-stage regression are included in the second-stage regression. This has been referred to as a control function approach,65 or two-stage residual inclusion method.66 If we have a ﬁrst-stage regression of X on Z with ﬁtted values X^jZ and residuals R^jZ ¼ X À X^jZ, then the adjusted two-stage estimate comes from a second-stage regression additively on X^jZ and R^jZ (or equivalently on X and R^jZ). The residuals from the ﬁrst-stage regression incorporate information on
confounders.
If the outcome is continuous, then inclusion of these residuals in a second-stage linear regression model does not
change the estimate, as the residuals are orthogonal to the ﬁtted values. If the outcome is binary, inclusion of these
residuals in a second-stage logistic regression model implies that the IV estimate is conditional on these residuals.
Numerically, it brings the IV estimate closer to the subject-speciﬁc log odds ratio; the parameter 1 in a logisticlinear model67

logit PðY ¼ 1jX ¼ x, U ¼ uÞ ¼ 0 þ 1x þ 2u

ð9Þ

where U represents all other covariates (whether confounders or not) in the probability model. Some investigators
have therefore recommended the adjusted two-stage method when the second-stage regression is logistic on the premise that it is less biased than the unadjusted two-stage method.66
Under a particular choice of mathematical model in which the ﬁrst-stage residual is equal (up to a multiplicative constant) to the term 2u in equation (9), the adjusted two-stage estimate is consistent for the parameter 1.66 However, this mathematical model is unrealistic, and in general the adjusted two-stage estimate is biased for this parameter.15,68 Further, when the covariates are unknown, as is usual in an IV analysis, it is not clear what
variable is represented by the ﬁrst-stage residuals, and so which covariates the adjusted two-stage estimate is
conditional on and which it is marginal across. It is uncertain what odds ratio is being estimated by an adjusted
two-stage approach, that is, to what question is the adjusted two-stage estimate the answer. We therefore do not
recommend adjustment for the ﬁrst-stage residuals in a two-stage method.

5 Likelihood-based methods
The above methods are not likelihood based and do not provide maximum likelihood estimates, which have the desirable properties of asymptotic unbiasedness, normality, and eﬃciency. So we next consider likelihood-based methods.

Burgess et al.

2341

5.1 Limited information maximum likelihood

If each individual i ¼ 1, . . . , N has exposure xi, outcome yi, and IVs zik indexed by k ¼ 1, . . . , K, we can assume the

following model

X

xi ¼ 0 þ kzik þ "Xi

ð10Þ

k

yi ¼ 0 þ 1xi þ "Yi

where the two error terms have a bivariate normal distribution.46 (These error terms diﬀer from those deﬁned in
equations (5) and (6).) The causal parameter of interest is 1. Correlation between "X and "Y is due to confounding. We can calculate the maximum likelihood estimates of 1 and each of the other parameters in the model. This is known as limited information maximum likelihood (LIML; see Section 18.5 in Davidson and MacKinnon69).
Conﬁdence intervals can be obtained by the assumption of asymptotic normality of the parameter estimates.
The term ‘limited information’ means that only limited information on the structure of the model is used. In
particular, if there were multiple outcomes or risk factors, only parameters from a single equation are estimated. This is in contrast to full information maximum likelihood or three-stage least squares (3SLS),70 in which the whole
system of equations in the model is estimated simultaneously. Full-system methods have the potential advantage of
eﬃciency, but the disadvantage of inconsistent estimation if one or more of these equations are misspeciﬁed.
However, in the context of Mendelian randomization with a single outcome and a single risk factor, there is no
distinction. LIML has been called the ‘maximum likelihood counterpart of 2SLS’71(p. 227) and gives the same causal estimate
as the 2SLS and ratio methods with a single IV. As with 2SLS, estimates are sensitive to heteroscedasticity and
misspeciﬁcation of the equations in the model. Use of LIML has been strongly discouraged by some, as LIML estimates do not have deﬁned moments for any number of instruments.54 However, use has also been encouraged
by others, especially with weak instruments, as the median of the distribution of the LIML estimator is close to unbiased even with weak instruments.56(p. 209)
The LIML estimate can be intuitively understood as the eﬀect 1 that minimizes the residual sum of squares from the regression of the component of the outcome not caused by the exposure, ðyi À 1xiÞ, on the IV(s). Informally, the LIML estimator is the causal parameter for which the component of the outcome due to
confounding is as badly predicted by the IVs as possible.

5.2 Bayesian methods

Inferences from a likelihood model can also be obtained in a Bayesian framework.72 Here, we consider a slightly diﬀerent likelihood model from equation (10) that has been discussed previously in the literature.42 For each

individual i, we model the observed exposure and outcome asPcoming from a bivariate normal distribution for ðXi, YiÞT with mean ði, iÞT and variance-covariance matrix . The mean of the exposure distribution i is

assumed to be a linear function of the instruments zik, k ¼ 1, . . . , K, and the mean of the outcome distribution

i is assumed to be a linear function of the mean exposure i73

 Xi 

 i  

$ N2

,Æ

Yi

i

X i ¼ 0 þ kzik

k

i ¼ 0 þ 1i

ð11Þ

This model is similar to that for the LIML method, except that the causal parameter 1 represents the causal eﬀect between the true means i and i rather than the measured values of outcome and exposure. The model can be estimated in a Markov chain Monte Carlo framework, such as that implemented in WinBUGS.74 The output is
a posterior distribution, from which the posterior mean or median can be interpreted as a point estimate, and the
2.5th and 97.5th percentiles as a ‘95% conﬁdence interval’. With vague priors, the posterior distribution is similar to the frequentist likelihood function.42
An advantage of the Bayesian approach is that, under the modelling assumptions, valid inferences can be
obtained that are not based on asymptotic results, but rather on the posterior distribution of the causal

2342

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

parameter. Simulations have shown that frequentist properties of inference (such as coverage levels) are more robust in the Bayesian approach with weak instruments.42

5.3 Likelihood-based methods with binary outcomes

Maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods can be applied to binary outcomes. If we assume a linear model of association between the logit-transformed probability of an event (i) and the exposure (a logistic-linear model), and a Bernoulli distribution for the outcome event, as in the following model

xi $ Nði, X2 Þ

yi $ BernoulliðiÞ

XK

ð12Þ

i ¼ 0 þ kzik

k¼1

logitðiÞ ¼ 0 þ 1i þ 2ðxi À iÞ

Estimates can be obtained by maximization of the joint likelihood, or in a Bayesian framework, obtaining posterior distributions by Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Inclusion of the coeﬃcient 2 is similar to a control function approach (Section 4.3), in which the ﬁrst-stage residual is adjusted for in the second-stage regression of a two-stage method. Alternatively, this term can be omitted, although formally this results in the likelihood model being misspeciﬁed.42 Simulations have suggested that both approaches give reasonable estimates, although they are aﬀected by non-collapsibility.
Log-linear models can in principle be estimated in the same way, although care is needed to ensure that the probabilities i do not exceed 1 at any point in the estimation procedure.

5.4 Comparison of two-stage and likelihood-based methods
In the two-stage methods, the two stages are performed sequentially. The output from the ﬁrst-stage regression is fed into the second-stage regression with no acknowledgement of uncertainty. In the likelihood-based methods, the two stages are performed simultaneously: the  and  parameters are estimated at the same time. Uncertainty in the ﬁrst-stage parameters is acknowledged and feedback between the regression stages is possible. The uncertainty in the estimate of the causal parameter 1 is therefore better represented in the likelihood-based approaches if there is non-negligible uncertainty in the ﬁrst-stage regression model. This provides a heuristic justiﬁcation why likelihood-based methods perform better than two-stage methods with weak instruments (see Section 7).

5.5 k-class estimators
The LIML and 2SLS estimators are part of a wider class of estimators known as k-class estimators.75 The k-class estimator of the causal eﬀect 1 from equation (10) is

^k ¼ ½YTðI À kPZÞYÀ1½YTðI À kPZÞX

ð13Þ

where Y is a N by 1 matrix of the outcome, Z is a N by Kþ1 matrix of the IVs (including a constant term), and X is À T ÁÀ1 T
a N by 2 matrix of the risk factor and a constant term. The matrix PZ ¼ I À Z Z Z Z is the projection matrix of Z.76 If k¼1, then ^k is the 2SLS estimator. If k is the smallest root of detÀYTY À kYTPzYÁ ¼ 0, then ^k is the LIML estimator. Several other choices are available, including the bias-corrected 2SLS estimator,54 and Fuller’s k estimator.77 These estimators are beyond the scope of this review.

6 Semi-parametric methods
A semi-parametric model has both parametric and non-parametric components. Typically semi-parametric estimators with IVs assume a parametric form for the model relating the outcome and exposure, but make no assumption on the distribution of the errors. Semi-parametric models are designed to be more robust to model misspeciﬁcation than fully parametric models.78

Burgess et al.

2343

6.1 Generalized method of moments
The generalized method of moments (GMM) is a semi-parametric estimator designed as a more ﬂexible form of 2SLS to deal with problems of heteroscedasticity of error distributions and non-linearity in the two-stage structural equations.61,79 With a single instrument, the estimator is chosen to give orthogonality between the instrument and the residuals from the second-stage regression. Using bold face to represent vectors, if we have

EðYjdoðX ¼ xÞÞ ¼ f ðx; bÞ

ð14Þ

then the GMM estimate is the value of b such that
X ðyi À fðyi; bÞÞ ¼ 0
i X ð15Þ and ziðyi À fðyi; bÞÞ ¼ 0
i

where the summation is across i, which indexes study participants. Equation (14) is a structural model, where

EðYjdoðX ¼ xÞÞ is the expectation of the distribution that Y would take if we forced X to equal x for all individuals.80

In the linear (or additive) case, fðyi; bÞ ¼ 0 þ 1xi; in the log-linear (or multiplicative) case,

fðyi; bÞ ¼ expitð0 þ 1xiÞ; and in the logistic case, fðyi; bÞ ¼ expitð0 þ 1xiÞ; where 1 is our causal parameter of interest and expitðzÞ ¼ ð1 À expðÀzÞÞÀ1, the inverse of logit(z). We can solve the two equations in (15) numerically.16

GMM estimates are sensitive to the parameterization used. For example, estimates from the estimating

equations (15) and from

XÀyi fðyi; bÞÀ1 À 1Á ¼ 0

i

and

ð16Þ

X z Ài yi fðyi; bÞÀ1 À 1Á ¼ 0

i

may be diﬀerent in ﬁnite samples, although they each assume the same structural model between the outcome and exposure. With a binary outcome, the second set of estimating equations is usually used, as this corresponds to a multiplicative error structure.15
When there is more than one IV, zi becomes zik and we have a separate estimating equation for each instrument k¼1, . . . , K. The orthogonality conditions for each instrument cannot generally be simultaneously satisﬁed. The estimate is usually taken as the minimizer of the objective function

ðy À f ðx; bÞÞTZðZTZÞÀ1ZTðy À f ðx; bÞÞ

ð17Þ

where Z ¼ ð1z1 . . . zKÞ is the N by K þ 1 matrix of instruments, including a column of 1s. Although this gives

consistent estimation for general matrix , eﬃcient estimation is achieved when ij ¼ covð"i, "jÞ (i,j ¼ 1, . . . , N), where ei is the residual yi À f ðyi; bÞ.81

As the estimation of  requires knowledge of the unknown b, a two-step approach is suggested. We ﬁrstly

estimate b* using ðZTZÞ ¼ I, where I is the identity mPatrix, which gPives consistent but not eﬃcient estimation of

b. We then use ei ¼ yi À f ðyi; bÃÞ to estimate ZTZ ¼ ziziT"2i as ziziTe2i in a second-stage estimation.79

i

i

6.2 Continuous updating estimator
An alternative approach is to express the weighting matrix  as a function of the causal parameter, and then to estimate the causal parameter and weighting matrix simultaneously by minimizing equation (17). This is known as the continuous updating estimator (CUE), as the weighting matrix updates during the estimation procedure.82 The CUE is similar to the LIML estimator in terms of conﬁdence intervals and ﬁnite sample bias,48 and the two

2344

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

estimators are equivalent if the residuals ei deﬁned above are homoscedastic.83 However, the CUE does not make the homoscedasticity assumption. The CUE and two-step GMM estimators have the same asymptotic distribution.83

6.3 G-estimation of structural mean models
G-estimation of a structural mean model (SMM) is another semi-parametric estimation method84,85 designed in the context of randomized trials with incomplete compliance.86,87 The potential outcome Y(x) is deﬁned as the outcome which would have been observed if the exposure X were set to x. In particular, the exposure-free outcome Y(0) is the outcome which would have been observed if we had set X to 0 rather than it taking its observed value of x.78
An explicit parametric form is assumed for the expected diﬀerence in potential outcomes between the outcome for the observed X ¼ x and the potential outcome for X¼0. In the continuous case, the linear or additive SMM is

EðYðxÞ À Yð0ÞjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ ¼ 1x

ð18Þ

and b1 is taken as the causal parameter of interest. In the context of non-compliance, this is referred to as the ‘eﬀect of treatment on the treated’.88 In this equation, there is no eﬀect modiﬁcation on the additive scale by Z.

As the expected exposure-free outcome E(Y(0)WX ¼ x,Z ¼ z) is statistically independent of Z, the causal eﬀect is

estimated as the value of b1 which gives zero covariance between EðYð0ÞjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ ¼ EðYðxÞ À 1xjX ¼ x,

Z ¼ zÞ and Z. The estimating equations are

X

ðzik À z"kÞðyi À 1xiÞ ¼ 0 k ¼ 1, . . . , K

ð19Þ

i
where z"k ¼ N1 P zik and the summation is across i, which indexes study participants. Where the mi odel for the expected outcomes is non-linear, this is known as a generalized SMM. With a binary

outcome, it is natural to use a log-linear (or multiplicative) SMM

log EðYðxÞjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ À log EðYð0ÞjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ ¼ 1x

ð20Þ

In this case, there is no eﬀect modiﬁcation by Z on the multiplicative scale.
The linear (additive) and log-linear (multiplicative) GMM and SMM approaches outlined give rise to the same estimating equations, and so software for GMM estimation can also be used for the estimation of a SMM.89 In the
case of a single IV, the linear GMM and SMM estimates coincide with the corresponding ratio estimate. With
multiple IVs, the estimating equations are not guaranteed to have a unique solution, and so an objective function
can be obtained and minimized in the same way as in the GMM approach. Eﬃcient estimates can be obtained using the same two-step method outlined for the GMM approach in Section 6.1.90
Unfortunately, a logistic SMM cannot be deﬁned in the same way, as the moment conditions in the estimating equations depend on unmeasured covariates due to the non-collapsibility of the odds ratio.91 This problem also arises in the GMM case,15 although GMM is an estimation method and so does not require the functional form
relating the exposure and outcome to be given the interpretation of a structural model. For a SMM, the problem can be resolved by estimating Y assuming an observational model90

logit EðYjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ ¼ 0a þ 1ax

ð21Þ

where the subscripts a indicate associational, and substituting estimates of Y into the structural model

logit EðYðxÞjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ À logit EðYð0ÞjX ¼ x, Z ¼ zÞ ¼ 1cx

ð22Þ

where the subscript c indicates causal. The associational parameters can be estimated by logistic regression, leading

to estimating equations

X

ðzik À z"kÞ expitðY^ðxÞ À 1cxiÞ ¼ 0 k ¼ 1, . . . , K

ð23Þ

i

where Y^ðxÞ ¼ ^0a þ ^1ax.

Burgess et al.

2345

Table 1. Summary table of features of instrumental variable methods considered in this paper.

Ratio method Two-stage methods
Likelihood-based methods Semi-parametric methods

Can only be used with a single IV. Can be used with summarized data. Efficient, but biased with weak instruments. Robust to misspecification in the
first-stage model. Flexible to incorporate different exposure–outcome models. Asymptotically efficient and less biased provided that the parametric assumptions hold. Requires coding by hand outside of the linear case. Less efficient, less stringent assumptions. No guarantee of unique estimate in finite samples.

6.4 Potential lack of unique estimate with binary outcomes
An issue with semi-parametric IV estimation in practice is that an estimate of the causal parameter may not be uniquely determined in ﬁnite samples. A parameter in a statistical model is identiﬁed if its value can be uniquely determined from the joint distribution of the observed variables in an inﬁnite sample.92 However, for a semiparametric instrumental variable analysis with a single IV and a binary outcome, the estimating equations may be almost ﬂat in the vicinity of the solution to the equations (known as weak identiﬁcation) or there may be multiple or no parameter values which satisfy the estimating equations.93 This is especially likely if the IV is weak. Consequently, estimates and standard errors reported by automated commands for GMM or SMM estimation can be misleading.
It is recommended that applied investigators wanting to use a GMM or SMM approach should plot the objective function of the relevant estimating equations for a large range of values of the parameter of interest to check if there is a unique solution. If there is not, this should be reported as an indication that there is a lack of information on the parameter in the data. An alternative estimation technique can be used, such as a two-stage method, but identiﬁcation will then rely on stronger assumptions.
A summary of features of the IV methods considered in this paper is given in Table 1. Having discussed various methods for IV estimation, we proceed to consider practical issues in the estimation of causal eﬀects, in particular the use of weak instruments.
7 Weak instruments
A ‘weak instrument’ is deﬁned as an IV for which the statistical evidence of association with the exposure is not strong. A weak IV diﬀers from an invalid IV (one that does not satisfy the IV assumptions) in that the IV estimate using a weak IV is asymptotically unbiased; a weak IV can be made stronger by increasing the sample size. The F statistic in the regression of the exposure on the IV (also known as the Cragg–Donald F statistic94) is usually quoted as a measure of the strength of an instrument.95 IV estimates demonstrate systematic ﬁnite sample bias, typically in the direction of the observational (confounded) association between the exposure and outcome.96 IVs with an F statistic less than 10 are often labelled as ‘weak instruments’.97 The value was chosen as the bias of the 2SLS IV estimate with an IV having an expected F statistic value of 10 is limited to 10% of the bias of the observational association. Such a binary characterization of IVs as weak or strong is misleading, as the bias is a continuous phenomenon. Additionally, the expected magnitude of bias does not depend on the value of the F statistic for a particular dataset, but the expected value of the F statistic (also known as the concentration parameter95). The F statistic is highly variable between datasets generated under the same data-generating mechanism, and so the F statistic in a given dataset cannot be relied on as an accurate predictor of the expected bias in that dataset.19
7.1 Problems of estimates using weak instruments
Aside from the bias suﬀered by IV estimates with weak instruments, the distribution of such IV estimates diﬀers substantially from a normal distribution. Conﬁdence intervals that rely on the asymptotic normality of IV estimates (such as those typically reported by statistical software packages for 2SLS or LIML methods) tend to underestimate the true uncertainty in the estimates, leading to inﬂated Type I error rates. With large numbers of IVs (10 or more), standard conﬁdence intervals from the LIML method with weak instruments are too narrow and a correction is needed (known as Bekker standard errors).98,83 Tables have been produced for the 2SLS method

2346

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

giving the expected value of the F statistic at which the maximum possible Type I error rate is less than 10%, 15%, 20%, and 25%.99 (Although the maximum error rate is only achieved when the correlation between the exposure
and outcome is one, so such extremes should not be expected in practice.) The power of a study with weak
instruments may also be low, although this is not necessarily the case if there are many weak instruments.
Correlation between IV estimates and standard errors can lead to bias being accentuated in a meta-analysis of
IV estimates, as in the sampling distributions, estimates closer to the observational association have greater estimated precision.100
These problems arise for IVs that are weak, but otherwise satisfy the IV assumptions. A more further problem
with weak instruments is sensitivity to violations of the IV assumptions: while studies with stronger instruments
can be insensitive to moderate violations of the IV assumptions, studies with weak instruments are extremely sensitive to tiny violations in the assumptions.101

7.2 Comparison of methods with single instrumental variable
As previously stated, if there is a single IV, the ratio, 2SLS, LIML, GMM and SMM IV estimates coincide. Although this IV estimate does not have a ﬁnite mean, simulations have shown that the median bias is close to zero even when the expected F statistic is around 5.42 An F statistic of 5 corresponds to a p-value for the association of the IV with the exposure of 0.03. It is unlikely that a variable would be used as an IV in practice unless the variable is expected to achieve a p-value of less than 0.03 in the sample under analysis. A causal eﬀect and its direction can be assessed with a single IV by testing for an association between the IV and outcome; this association will be a valid test of the null hypothesis of no causal eﬀect even with a weak instrument.9 Hence, unless bias is introduced via another mechanism (such as choosing between candidate IVs on the basis of their strength in the data under analysis100), the problems of weak instruments should not arise with a single instrumental variable.

7.3 Multiple instrument variables and score-based approach

The bias of the IV estimate from the 2SLS method with a continuous outcome is approximately 1/E(F) of the bias

of the observational association, where E(F) is the expected value of the F statistic from the ﬁrst-stage regression.

In contrast, the median bias of estimates from the LIML and CUE methods is close to zero, making them useful

tools for sensitivity analysis. However, in ﬁnite samples with multiple IVs, the LIML method is generally less eﬃcient than 2SLS.98 A simulation analysis showed that conﬁdence intervals from the LIML and CUE methods

with large numbers of IVs were much wider than those from other IV methods, despite nominal coverage levels not being maintained83; use of Bekker standard errors to maintain nominal coverage levels resulted in conﬁdence

intervals that were wider still.

A recent innovation in Mendelian randomization is to reduce data from multiple instrumental variables into a single univariate score, known as an allele score or genetic risk score.102 An unweighted score is constructed as the

total number of exposure-increasing alleles present in the genotype of an individual. A weighted score can also be

considered, in which each IV contributes a weight reﬂecting the eﬀect of the corresponding genetic variant on the

exposure. If an individuaPl i has gik copies of the exposure-increasing allele for each variant k ¼ 1, . . . , K, then their

unweighted score is zi ¼

K k¼1

gik

.

If

all

genetic

variants

are

diallelic

SNPsP, this

score

takes

integer

values

between

0

and 2K. If the weight for variant k is wk, then their weighted score is zi ¼ k¼1 K wkgik: Either score can then be used

in an IV analysis.

If the weights in a weighted score are derived naively from the data under analysis, then the score-based approach

is eﬀectively a 2SLS analysis, and there is no methodological beneﬁt of the approach to a 2SLS analysis in terms of

bias. However, if the weights are determined externally from prior knowledge or an independent data source, or from the data under analysis by a cross-validation or jackknife approach,103 then eﬀectively the IV analysis uses a single

instrumental variable, reducing bias to negligible levels. Additionally, when the true eﬀect sizes of the IVs do not vary

greatly, score-based approaches have been shown to give greater precision than LIML and related methods, even when the weights for the score are misspeciﬁed or an unweighted score is used.83,102 We would therefore recommend a

score-based approach to IV analysis when there are a multiple potentially weak IVs.

A caveat is that the use of large numbers of IVs increases the possibility that one or more of the IVs is invalid, leading to potentially misleading estimates.101 It is therefore important not only to cite genetic

associations with the outcome for the allele score but also for the constituent genetic variants, so that the

consistency of estimates across the genetic variants can be assessed. Although allele scores can address a wide

range of analysis questions in Mendelian randomization, more complex questions (such as analyses with

Burgess et al.

2347

multiple risk factors104) cannot be addressed using an allele score method and require the use of alternative methods.

8 Discussion
In this ﬁnal section, we discuss various practical topics relevant to IV estimation, as well as extensions to the scenario considered in this paper of individual-level data from a single source to estimate a linear causal eﬀect.

8.1 Non-linear relationships
With a linear exposure–outcome relationship, the estimate from a linear IV analysis, such as using the ratio or
2SLS method, is the average change in the outcome for a uniform change (usually a 1 unit increase) in the
distribution of the exposure across the population for all individuals whose exposure level is inﬂuenced by their value of the IV.27 For a non-linear relationship, a linear IV estimate approximates the same population-averaged
causal eﬀect when the change in the distribution of the exposure associated with the IV is small, and when the
linear IV estimate is scaled to represent the eﬀect of a change in the exposure of similar magnitude to that associated with a change in the IV.34
Although non-linear parametric two-stage IV methods have been proposed, inferences based on such methods have been shown to be highly sensitive to the choice of parameterization.105,106 Equally, non-parametric two-stage IV methods have been explored,107 but evidence on the shape of the causal relationship can only be inferred for the range of ﬁtted values for the exposure (X^WZ). A recent development is the estimation of local IV estimates within strata of the exposure.34 However, if the exposure is stratiﬁed on directly, misleading results may be obtained. This
is because the exposure lies on the causal pathway between the IV and the outcome, and so conditioning on the
exposure induces an association between the IV and confounders. This can be circumvented by initially subtracting
the eﬀect of the IVs on the exposure from the exposure measurement, to obtain the ‘IV-free exposure’. This
quantity, representing the expected value of the exposure for an individual if their IVs took the value zero, can then be safely conditioned on.108 Conditioning on this quantity is equivalent to conditioning on the residual from the ﬁrst-stage regression,65 known as the ‘control function approach’.109 For this non-linear estimation approach
to be valid, it is necessary for the association of the IV with the exposure in the population to remain constant at diﬀerent levels of the exposure.110

8.2 Use of measured covariates
If we can ﬁnd measured covariates which explain variation in the exposure or a continuous outcome, then we can incorporate such covariates into our analysis. Including covariates generally increases eﬃciency and hence the precision of the causal estimate. However, it may lead to bias in the causal estimate if a covariate is on the causal pathway between exposure and outcome or is a collider or causally downstream of a collider. A collider is a variable that is inﬂuenced both by the exposure or a causal consequent thereof and by the outcome or a causal consequent thereof.111 There may also be bias if the analysis model including the covariate is misspeciﬁed. In a two-stage estimation, any covariate adjusted for in the ﬁrst-stage regression should also be adjusted for in the second-stage regression112; failure to do so can cause associations between the IV and confounders leading to bias.56(p. 189)
In some cases, adjustment for covariates is necessary to ensure validity of the IVs, as the IV assumptions only hold conditional on the covariates. An example in Mendelian randomization is the case of population stratiﬁcation, in which the sample population consists of subpopulations that have diﬀerent distributions of the IV and outcome.5 These subpopulations may correspond to ethnic subgroups in the population. An association between the IV and outcome may solely correspond to diﬀerences in ethnicity and not to any biological eﬀect of the exposure. This can be addressed at least partially with genome-wide data, by adjusting for genetic principal components in the IV analysis,113 although there is no theoretical guarantee that adjustment for genetic principal components will resolve the problem of population stratiﬁcation. In general, aside from these cases, we discourage adjustment for covariates in the primary analysis result for the assessment of a causal eﬀect.

8.3 Overidentification tests
When more than one instrument is used, an overidentiﬁcation test, such as the Sargan test,114 can be carried out to test whether the associations of the instruments with the outcome are statistically compatible with a single linear

2348

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

causal eﬀect of the exposure. Overidentiﬁcation means that the number of instruments used is greater than the number of exposures measured. (The latter is usually one, although analyses with multiple exposure variables have also been considered.115,116) When there is more than one IV for a single exposure, separate causal estimates can be calculated using each IV in turn. The overidentiﬁcation test assesses whether the parameters being estimated by each IV separately are the same, or equivalently whether the IVs have residual associations with the outcome once the main eﬀect of the exposure has been removed.117 Failure of an overidentiﬁcation test indicates heterogeneity in the eﬀect estimates from each IV, which suggests that the IV assumptions may be violated for one or more genetic variants.
Overidentiﬁcation tests are omnibus tests, where the alternative hypothesis includes failure of IV assumptions for one IV, failure for all IVs, a non-linear association between the exposure and outcome, and that diﬀerent IVs identify diﬀerent magnitudes of causal eﬀect.118 However, in many practical cases they have low power,119 and so failure to reject an overidentiﬁcation test should not be overinterpreted as positive evidence for the validity of the IV assumptions.

8.4 Endogeneity tests
Some applied Mendelian randomization analyses have reported on whether there is a diﬀerence between the observational and IV estimates as the primary outcome of interest120; this can be formally tested using the Durbin–Wu–Hausman test.118 This is a test of equality of the observational and IV estimates, where a signiﬁcant result indicates disagreement between the two estimates. It is called an endogeneity test.
While an informal comparison of the observational and causal estimates may be reasonable, for instance to judge whether a Mendelian randomization investigation has suﬃcient power for a null result to be informative, an endogeneity test should not be viewed as a primary analysis result. This is because the outcome of an endogeneity test neither implies the presence nor the absence of a causal eﬀect. It is more appropriate to consider the presence or absence of a causal eﬀect as the subject of investigation.39 The conﬁdence interval of the causal estimate gives the researcher a sense of the plausible size of any possible causal eﬀect based on the data available.

8.5 Power of IV analyses
The conﬁdence interval of an IV estimate is typically much wider compared with that of an observational estimate, for example from a regression analysis. The sample size required to obtain precise enough causal estimates to be clinically relevant can be very large.121 A rule of thumb for power is that the sample size for a conventional analysis should be divided by the coeﬃcient of determination (R2) of the IV on the exposure.122 Formulae for power and sample size calculation have been published with a continuous outcome123,124 and with a binary outcome,125 and online tools for performing these calculations are available (http://glimmer.rstudio.com/kn3in/
mRnd/ and http://sb452.shinyapps.io/power/).

8.6 Summarized data
In an applied context, it may not be practical or desirable to share individual-level data on the IV, exposure, and outcome. With a single IV, the ratio method can be implemented simply using summarized estimates on the associations of the IV with the outcome and with the exposure. Methods for obtaining IV estimates using summarized data on multiple IVs have been discussed elsewhere126: these include a likelihood-based method for the summarized association estimates, and an inverse-variance weighted method combining the ratio estimates from each IV in a meta-analysis model.127 A tool to implement these methods is available online (http:// sb452.shinyapps.io/summarized/).

8.7 Subsample and two-sample Mendelian randomization
Especially when the outcome is binary, the sample size required in a Mendelian randomization experiment may be prohibitively large due to the expense of collecting data on the exposure. In this case, a subsample IV approach may be a cost-eﬀective approach. Rather than collecting data on the exposure from the entire study sample, exposure data can be measured for a random subsample of (control) participants. As the association between the IV and the exposure is typically stronger than that between the IV and the outcome, the precision of the IV estimate may not be noticeably aﬀected by reducing the sample size on which the exposure is measured.

Burgess et al.

2349

Simulations have shown that a subsample IV analysis with exposure data on only 10% of participants may retain 90% of the power of the full-sample IV analysis.128 Estimates and conﬁdence intervals with a single IV can be calculated using the ratio method and Fieller’s theorem (Section 3.4). With multiple IVs, a modiﬁed version of the two-stage least squares method can be used.129
An alternative design is two-sample Mendelian randomization, in which the associations between the IV(s) and the exposure and between the IV(s) and the outcome are estimated from non-overlapping sets of individuals.130 Although this may simply reﬂect the absence of a dataset with concomitant information on all three of the IV(s), exposure, and outcome, it is also a potentially eﬃcient design strategy for Mendelian randomization, particularly in view of the increasing public availability of summarized data on genetic associations with risk factors and disease outcomes from large consortia. Several consortia with large numbers of participants, such as CARDIoGRAMplusC4D for coronary artery disease131 and DIAGRAM for type 2 diabetes,132 have published summarized data on the association of catalogues of genetic variants with either risk factors or disease status. These provide precise estimates of genetic associations which can be used to obtain causal estimates, provided the genetic variants included in the analysis are restricted to those for which the IV assumptions are valid. This makes two-sample Mendelian randomization using summarized data a worthwhile analysis strategy from the perspective of power, and one that should be encouraged in practice, particularly if there is available summarized data on genetic associations with the outcome.133 The only caveat is that the two samples used should be as similar as possible (particularly with respect to nationality/ethnicity, but also to other population characteristics). This is because genetic variants that are valid IVs in one population may not be valid IVs in another population, and to ensure that the magnitudes of genetic associations with the risk factor in the ﬁrst sample are relevant estimates of the genetic associations in the second sample.

8.8 Meta-analysis
The demands of power often demand synthesis of evidence from multiple, possibly heterogeneous studies. Data from multiple studies can be combined to provide a single causal estimate in a meta-analysis model. If it is possible to estimate the causal eﬀect in each study, meta-analysis can be performed directly on these estimated causal eﬀects, for example using inverse-variance weighting.134 However, a study-level meta-analysis can accentuate weak instrument bias,100 and so it is preferable to combine either individual-level or summarized data from each study. Additionally, it may be that some studies only provide data on one of the exposure or the outcome, and so a causal eﬀect cannot be estimated from that study alone. A hierarchical model can be therefore proposed, in which the study-speciﬁc parameters are pooled in a between-study model. This could also be a more eﬃcient use of data if the same genetic variants were used in separate studies. Such a model can be ﬁtted using likelihood methods on either individual-level data or summarized data from each study.135

8.9 Robust methods
Instrumental variable estimation methods that are robust to the violation of the IV assumptions for some or all of the ‘instruments’ have been the subject of recent methodological development. A full exposition of these methods is beyond the scope of this manuscript, but we provide a brief overview of some of these developments.
Given multiple candidate IVs, if over half of the ‘instruments’ satisfy the IV assumptions, then the median of the IV estimates using each of the ‘instruments’ individually is a consistent estimate of the causal eﬀect.136 A more eﬃcient estimator than this simple median can be constructed by a weighted median method.137 Here, rather than assuming over 50% of the ‘instruments’ are valid IVs, we assume that ‘instruments’ representing over 50% of the weight are valid IVs.
Alternatively, a consistent causal estimate can be obtained by allowing the ‘instruments’ to have direct eﬀects on the outcome, but limiting the total magnitude of these direct eﬀects, for example using L1-penalization.138 Conﬁdence intervals under the assumption that over 50% of the ‘instruments’ are valid IVs have also been developed.139 Software for performing this penalization method is available in the R package sisVIVE.140
Finally, direct eﬀects of the IVs on the outcome can be accounted for by regressing the IV – outcome association estimates on the IV – exposure association estimates. If the associations of IVs with the outcome consist of a causal component, representing the eﬀect of the exposure on the outcome, and a pleiotropic component, representing the direct eﬀect of the IV on the outcome not via the risk factor, then the intercept from this regression model is an estimate of the average direct eﬀect of each IV on the outcome.141 If the IV assumptions are satisﬁed, then the true direct eﬀect of each IV on the outcome is zero. A test of whether the

2350

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

intercept estimate diﬀers from zero is an assessment of the presence of directional (that is, unbalanced) pleiotropy. This is equivalent to Egger’s test, an assessment of small sample bias (including publication bias) in metaanalysis.142,143
Under a weaker set of assumptions than the standard IV assumptions (namely that the direct eﬀects of IVs on the outcome are distributed independently of instrument strength144), the slope parameter from this regression with an intercept term is a consistent estimate of the causal eﬀect. This method can be used to give a consistent estimate of the causal eﬀect even if all the ‘instruments’ are invalid, but it requires the standard untestable assumption of no direct eﬀects of the IVs on the outcome to be replaced with another untestable (albeit weaker) assumption.

8.10 Summary
Methods for IV analysis range from the very simple to the more complicated. The development of complex methods has been driven by the desire to produce eﬃcient estimates, for example by integrating data on multiple IVs or multiple studies, or to provide robustness against weak instruments or misspeciﬁcation of the modelling assumptions.
In conclusion, we emphasize that the main diﬃculty in an IV analysis is not the choice of analysis method but rather the choice of IVs and the assessment of the IV assumptions. If the IV assumptions do not hold, then inferences from any analysis method will be unreliable.26 Although there are some contexts where a particular method is unsuitable (such as with large numbers of weak instruments), there is no single universal ‘best’ IV estimation method. Instead, the use of diﬀerent IV methods provides sensitivity analyses to assess whether the estimate given by a particular choice of method is credible.

Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Stephen Burgess is supported by the Wellcome Trust (grant number 100114). Dylan Small was supported by a grant from the US National Science Foundation Measurement, Methodology and Statistics program. Simon G Thompson is supported by the British Heart Foundation (grant number CH/12/2/29428). No speciﬁc funding was received for the writing of this manuscript.
References
1. Greenland S. An introduction to instrumental variables for epidemiologists. Int J Epidemiol 2000; 29: 722–729. 2. Martens EP, Pestman WR, de Boer A, et al. Instrumental variables: application and limitations. Epidemiology 2006; 17:
260–267. 3. Zohoori N and Savitz DA. Econometric approaches to epidemiologic data: relating endogeneity and unobserved
heterogeneity to confounding. Ann Epidemiol 1997; 7: 251–257. 4. Rassen JA, Brookhart MA, Glynn RJ, et al. Instrumental variables I: instrumental variables exploit natural variation in
nonexperimental data to estimate causal relationships. J Clin Epidemiol 2009; 62: 1226–1232. 5. Lawlor D, Harbord R, Sterne J, et al. Mendelian randomization: using genes as instruments for making causal inferences
in epidemiology. Stat Med 2008; 27: 1133–1163. 6. Davey Smith G and Ebrahim S. ‘Mendelian randomization’: can genetic epidemiology contribute to understanding
environmental determinants of disease? Int J Epidemiol 2003; 32: 1–22. 7. Burgess S, Butterworth A, Malarstig A, et al. Use of Mendelian randomisation to assess potential benefit of clinical
intervention. Br Med J 2012; 345: e7325. 8. Herna´ n MA and Robins JM. Instruments for causal inference: an epidemiologist’s dream? Epidemiology 2006; 17: 360–372. 9. Didelez V and Sheehan N. Mendelian randomization as an instrumental variable approach to causal inference. Stat Meth
Med Res 2007; 16: 309–330. 10. Glymour MM, Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ and Robins JM. Credible Mendelian randomization studies: approaches for
evaluating the instrumental variable assumptions. Am J Epidemiol 2012; 175: 332–339. 11. Angrist JD, Imbens GW and Rubin DB. Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. J Am Stat Assoc
1996; 91: 444–455.

Burgess et al.

2351

12. Didelez V, Meng S and Sheehan NA. Assumptions of IV methods for observational epidemiology. Stat Sci 2010; 25: 22–40.
13. Baiocchi M, Cheng J and Small DS. Instrumental variable methods for causal inference. Stat Med 2014; 33: 2297–2340. 14. Palmer TM, Lawlor DA, Harbord RM, et al. Using multiple genetic variants as instrumental variables for modifiable risk
factors. Stat Meth Med Res 2011; 21: 223–242. 15. Clarke PS and Windmeijer F. Instrumental variable estimators for binary outcomes. J Am Stat Assoc 2012; 107:
1638–1652. 16. Palmer TM, Sterne JAC, Harbord RM, et al. Instrumental variable estimation of causal risk ratios and causal odds ratios
in Mendelian randomization analyses. Am J Epidemiol 2011; 173: 1392–1403. 17. Vansteelandt S, Bowden J, Babanezhad M, et al. On instrumental variables estimation of causal odds ratios. Stat Sci 2011;
26: 403–422. 18. Davies NM, Smith GD, Windmeijer F, et al. Issues in the reporting and conduct of instrumental variable studies: a
systematic review. Epidemiology 2013; 24: 363–369. 19. Burgess S and Thompson SG. Bias in causal estimates from Mendelian randomization studies with weak instruments. Stat
Med 2011; 30: 1312–1323. 20. Sussman JB and Hayward RA. An IV for the RCT: using instrumental variables to adjust for treatment contamination in
randomised controlled trials. Br Med J 2010; 340: c2073. 21. Frangakis CE and Rubin DB. Principal stratification in causal inference. Biometrics 2002; 58: 21–29. 22. Sheehan NA, Didelez V, Burton PR, et al. Mendelian randomisation and causal inference in observational epidemiology.
PLoS Med 2008; 5: e177. 23. Kamstrup PR, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Steffensen R, et al. Genetically elevated lipoprotein(a) and increased risk of
myocardial infarction. J Am Med Assoc 2009; 301: 2331–2339. 24. Balke A and Pearl J. Bounds on treatment effects from studies with imperfect compliance. J Am Stat Assoc 1997; 92:
1171–1176. 25. Chesher A. Nonparametric identification under discrete variation. Econometrica 2005; 73: 1525–1550. 26. Bound J, Jaeger D and Baker R. The cure can be worse than the disease: a cautionary tale regarding instrumental variables.
NBER Working Paper No. 137. Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1993. 27. Imbens GW and Angrist JD. Identification and estimation of local average treatment effects. Econometrica 1994; 62:
467–475. 28. Yau LH and Little RJ. Inference for the complier-average causal effect from longitudinal data subject to noncompliance
and missing data, with application to a job training assessment for the unemployed. J Am Stat Assoc 2001; 96: 1232–1244. 29. Swanson S and Herna´ n M. Commentary: how to report instrumental variable analyses (suggestions welcome).
Epidemiology 2013; 24: 370–374. 30. Robins JM. The analysis of randomized and nonrandomized AIDS treatment trials using a new approach to causal
inference in longitudinal studies. In: Sechrest L, Freeman HE and Mulley AG (eds) Health service research methodology: a focus on AIDS. Washington, DC: National Center for Health Services Research, 1989, pp.113–159. 31. Pang M, Kaufman JS and Platt RW. Studying noncollapsibility of the odds ratio with marginal structural and logistic regression models. Stat Meth Med Res 2016; 25: 1925–1937. 32. VanderWeele T, Tchetgen Tchetgen E, Cornelis M, et al. Methodological challenges in Mendelian randomization. Epidemiology 2014; 25: 427–435. 33. Wald A. The fitting of straight lines if both variables are subject to error. Ann Math Stat 1940; 11: 284–300. 34. Burgess S, Davies N, Thompson S, et al. Instrumental variable analysis with a nonlinear exposure–outcome relationship. Epidemiology 2014; 25: 877–885. 35. Greenland S and Thomas DC. On the need for the rare disease assumption in case-control studies. Am J Epidemiol 1982; 116: 547–553. 36. Collett D. Modelling binary data. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, 2003. 37. Minelli C, Thompson J, Tobin M, et al. An integrated approach to the meta-analysis of genetic association studies using Mendelian randomization. Am J Epidemiol 2004; 160: 445–452. 38. Bowden J and Vansteelandt S. Mendelian randomisation analysis of case-control data using structural mean models. Stat Med 2011; 30: 678–694. 39. Thomas DC, Lawlor DA and Thompson JR. Re: Estimation of bias in nongenetic observational studies using ‘‘Mendelian triangulation’’ by Bautista et al. Ann Epidemiol 2007; 17: 511–513. 40. Fieller E. Some problems in interval estimation. J R Stat Soc Ser B 1954; 16: 175–185. 41. Buonaccorsi J. Fieller’s theorem. In: Armitage P and Colton T (eds) Encyclopedia of biostatistics. London, UK: Wiley, 2005, pp.1951–1952. 42. Burgess S and Thompson SG. Improvement of bias and coverage in instrumental variable analysis with weak instruments for continuous and binary outcomes. Stat Med 2012; 31: 1582–1600. 43. Efron B and Tibshirani R. An introduction to the bootstrap. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, 1993. 44. Imbens G and Rosenbaum P. Robust, accurate confidence intervals with a weak instrument: quarter of birth and education. J R Stat Soc Ser A 2005; 168: 109–126.

2352

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

45. Moreira M, Porter J and Suarez G. Bootstrap validity for the score test when instruments may be weak. J Econometr 2009; 149: 52–64.
46. Anderson TW and Rubin H. Estimators of the parameters of a single equation in a complete set of stochastic equations. Ann Math Stat 1949; 21: 570–582.
47. Moreira M. A conditional likelihood ratio test for structural models. Econometrica 2003; 71: 1027–1048. 48. Newey WK and Windmeijer F. Generalized method of moments with many weak moment conditions. Econometrica 2009;
77: 687–719. 49. Mikusheva A. Robust confidence sets in the presence of weak instruments. J Econometr 2010; 157: 236–247. 50. Davidson R and MacKinnon J. Confidence sets based on inverting Anderson–Rubin tests. Econometr J 2014; 17: S39–S58. 51. Mikusheva A and Poi BP. Tests and confidence sets with correct size when instruments are potentially weak. Stata J 2006;
6: 335–347. 52. Small D. ivpack: instrumental variable estimation. R package version 1.1, http://cran.r-project.org/package=ivpack (2014,
accessed 24 July 2015). 53. Kinal TW. The existence of moments of k-class estimators. Econometrica 1980; 48: 241–249. 54. Hahn J, Hausman JA and Kuersteiner GM. Estimation with weak instruments: accuracy of higher-order bias and MSE
approximations. Econometr J 2004; 7: 272–306. 55. Angrist JD, Graddy K and Imbens GW. The interpretation of instrumental variables estimators in simultaneous equations
models with an application to the demand for fish. Rev Econ Stud 2000; 67: 499–527. 56. Angrist JD and Pischke JS. Chapter 4: Instrumental variables in action: sometimes you get what you need. Mostly harmless
econometrics: an empiricist’s companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009, pp.113–220. 57. Wooldridge JM. Chapter 9: Simultaneous equations models. In: Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, pp.239–280. 58. Frost C and Thompson SG. Correcting for regression dilution bias: comparison of methods for a single predictor variable.
J R Stat Soc Ser A 2000; 163: 173–189. 59. Pierce B and VanderWeele T. The effect of non-differential measurement error on bias, precision and power in Mendelian
randomization studies. Int J Epidemiol 2012; 41: 1383–1393. 60. Hardin J, Schmiediche H and Carroll R. Instrumental variables, bootstrapping, and generalized linear models. Stata J
2003; 3: 351–360. 61. Foster E. Instrumental variables for logistic regression: an illustration. Soc Sci Res 1997; 26: 487–504. 62. Greenland S, Robins J and Pearl J. Confounding and collapsibility in causal inference. Stat Sci 1999; 14: 29–46. 63. Ducharme GR and LePage Y. Testing collapsibility in contingency tables. J R Stat Soc Ser B 1986; 48: 197–205. 64. Burgess S and CCGC (CRP CHD Genetics Collaboration). Identifying the odds ratio estimated by a two-stage
instrumental variable analysis with a logistic regression model. Stat Med 2013; 32: 4726–4747. 65. Nagelkerke N, Fidler V, Bernsen R, et al. Estimating treatment effects in randomized clinical trials in the presence of non-
compliance. Stat Med 2000; 19: 1849–1864. 66. Terza JV, Basu A and Rathouz PJ. Two-stage residual inclusion estimation: addressing endogeneity in health econometric
modeling. J Health Econ 2008; 27: 531–543. 67. Palmer T, Thompson J, Tobin M, et al. Adjusting for bias and unmeasured confounding in Mendelian randomization
studies with binary responses. Int J Epidemiol 2008; 37: 1161–1168. 68. Cai B, Small DS and Ten Have TR. Two-stage instrumental variable methods for estimating the causal odds ratio: analysis
of bias. Stat Med 2011; 30: 1809–1824. 69. Davidson R and MacKinnon J. Chapter 18: Simultaneous equation models. In: Estimation and inference in econometrics.
Oxford University Press, 1993. 70. Zellner A and Theil H. Three-stage least squares: simultaneous estimation of simultaneous equations. Econometrica 1962;
30: 54–78. 71. Hayashi F. Econometrics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000. 72. Kleibergen F and Zivot E. Bayesian and classical approaches to instrumental variable regression. J Econometr 2003; 114:
29–72. 73. Jones E, Thompson J, Didelez V, et al. On the choice of parameterisation and priors for the Bayesian analyses of
Mendelian randomisation studies. Stat Med 2012; 31: 1483–1501. 74. Spiegelhalter D, Thomas A, Best N, et al. WinBUGS version 1.4 user manual. Cambridge, UK: MRC Biostatistics Unit,
2003. 75. Nagar A. The bias and moment matrix of the general k-class estimators of the parameters in simultaneous equations.
Econometrica 1959; 27: 575–595. 76. Stock JH and Yogo M. Asymptotic distributions of instrumental variables statistics with many instruments. In: Andrews
DW and Stock JH (eds) Identification and inference for econometric models: essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp.109–119. 77. Fuller WA. Some properties of a modification of the limited information estimator. Econometrica 1977; 45: 939–953. 78. Clarke P and Windmeijer F. Instrumental variable estimators for binary outcomes. Working Paper No. 10/239. University of Bristol, UK: Centre for Market and Public Organisation, 2010.

Burgess et al.

2353

79. Johnston K, Gustafson P, Levy A, et al. Use of instrumental variables in the analysis of generalized linear models in the presence of unmeasured confounding with applications to epidemiological research. Stat Med 2008; 27: 1539–1556.
80. Pearl J. Causality: models, reasoning, and inference. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 81. Hansen LP. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators. Econometrica 1982; 50: 1029–1054. 82. Hansen LP, Heaton J and Yaron A. Finite-sample properties of some alternative GMM estimators. J Business Econ Stat
1996; 14: 262–280. 83. Davies N, von Hinke Kessler Scholder S, Farbmacher H, et al. The many weak instrument problem and Mendelian
randomization. Stat Med 2015; 34: 454–468. 84. Robins J. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure period–application to control
of the healthy worker survivor effect. Math Model 1986; 7: 1393–1512. 85. Greenland S, Lanes S and Jara M. Estimating effects from randomized trials with discontinuations: the need for intent-to-
treat design and G-estimation. Clin Trial 2008; 5: 5–13. 86. Robins JM. Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using structural nested mean models. Commun Stat –
Theor Meth 1994; 23: 2379–2412. 87. Fischer-Lapp K and Goetghebeur E. Practical properties of some structural mean analyses of the effect of compliance in
randomized trials. Control Clin Trial 1999; 20: 531–546. 88. Dunn G, Maracy M and Tomenson B. Estimating treatment effects from randomized clinical trials with noncompliance
and loss to follow-up: the role of instrumental variable methods. Stat Meth Med Res 2005; 14: 369–395. 89. Clarke P, Palmer T and Windmeijer F. Estimating structural mean models with multiple instrumental variables using the
generalised method of moments. Working Paper No. 11/266. University of Bristol, UK: Centre for Market and Public Organisation, 2011. 90. Vansteelandt S and Goetghebeur E. Causal inference with generalized structural mean models. J R Stat Soc Ser B 2003; 65: 817–835. 91. Robins J. Marginal structural models versus structural nested models as tools for causal inference. In: Halloran ME and Berry D (eds) Statistical models in epidemiology: the environment and clinical trials. New York, NY: Springer, 1999, pp.95–134. 92. Pearl J. Causality: models, reasoning, and inference, 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 93. Burgess S, Granell R, Palmer TM, et al. Lack of identification in semi-parametric instrumental variable models with binary outcomes. Am J Epidemiol 2014; 180: 111–119. 94. Baum CF, Schaffer ME and Stillman S. Enhanced routines for instrumental variables/generalized method of moments estimation and testing. Stata J 2007; 7: 465–506. 95. Stock J, Wright J and Yogo M. A survey of weak instruments and weak identification in generalized method of moments. J Business Econ Stat 2002; 20: 518–529. 96. Bound J, Jaeger D and Baker R. Problems with instrumental variables estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory variable is weak. J Am Stat Assoc 1995; 90: 443–450. 97. Staiger D and Stock J. Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments. Econometrica 1997; 65: 557–586. 98. Bekker P. Alternative approximations to the distributions of instrumental variable estimators. Econometrica 1994; 62: 657–681. 99. Stock J and Yogo M. Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. In: Andrews DW and Stock JH (eds) Identification and inference for econometric models: essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp.80–108. 100. Burgess S, Thompson SG and CCGC (CRP CHD Genetics Collaboration). Avoiding bias from weak instruments in Mendelian randomization studies. Int J Epidemiol 2011; 40: 755–764. 101. Small DS and Rosenbaum PR. War and wages: the strength of instrumental variables and their sensitivity to unobserved biases. J Am Stat Assoc 2008; 103: 924–933. 102. Burgess S and Thompson S. Use of allele scores as instrumental variables for Mendelian randomization. Int J Epidemiol 2013; 42: 1134–1144. 103. Angrist JD, Imbens G and Krueger AB. Jackknife instrumental variables estimation. J Appl Econometr 1999; 14: 57–67. 104. Burgess S and Thompson S. Multivariable Mendelian randomization: the use of pleiotropic genetic variants to estimate causal effects. Am J Epidemiol 2015; 181: 251–260. 105. Mogstad M and Wiswall M. Linearity in instrumental variables estimation: problems and solutions. Bonn, Germany: Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit, 2010. 106. Horowitz JL. Applied nonparametric instrumental variables estimation. Econometrica 2011; 79: 347–394. 107. Newey WK and Powell JL. Instrumental variable estimation of nonparametric models. Econometrica 2003; 71: 1565–1578. 108. Silverwood RJ, Holmes MV, Dale CE, et al. Testing for non-linear causal effects using a binary genotype in a Mendelian randomization study: application to alcohol and cardiovascular traits. Int J Epidemiol 2014; 43: 1781–1790. 109. Blundell R and Powell J. Endogeneity in nonparametric and semiparametric regression models. Advances in economics and econometrics: theory and applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp.312–357. ?8th World Congress of the Econometric Society.

2354

Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26(5)

110. Small DS. Commentary: Interpretation and sensitivity analysis for the localized average causal effect curve. Epidemiology 2014; 25: 886–888.
111. Cole SR, Platt RW, Schisterman EF, et al. Illustrating bias due to conditioning on a collider. Int J Epidemiol 2010; 39: 417–420.
112. Wooldridge JM. Chapter 15: Instrumental variables estimation and two stage least squares. In: Introductory econometrics: a modern approach. Nashville, TN: South-Western, 2009, pp.506–545.
113. Price AL, Patterson NJ, Plenge RM, et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies. Nature Genet 2006; 38: 904–909.
114. Sargan J. The estimation of economic relationships using instrumental variables. Econometrica 1958; 26: 393–415. 115. Angrist JD. Instrumental variables methods in experimental criminological research: what, why and how. J Exp Criminol
2006; 2: 23–44. 116. Burgess S, Freitag D, Khan H, et al. Using multivariable Mendelian randomization to disentangle the causal effects of
lipid fractions. PLoS One 2014; 9: e108891. 117. Wehby G, Ohsfeldt R and Murray J. ‘‘Mendelian randomization’’ equals instrumental variable analysis with genetic
instruments. Stat Med 2008; 27: 2745–2749. 118. Baum C, Schaffer M and Stillman S. Instrumental variables and GMM: estimation and testing. Stata J 2003; 3: 1–31. 119. Small DS. Sensitivity analysis for instrumental variables regression with overidentifying restrictions. J Am Stat Assoc
2007; 102: 1049–1058. 120. Bautista LE, Smeeth L, Hingorani AD, et al. Estimation of bias in nongenetic observational studies using ‘‘Mendelian
triangulation’’. Ann Epidemiol 2006; 16: 675–680. 121. Ebrahim S and Davey Smith G. Mendelian randomization: can genetic epidemiology help redress the failures of
observational epidemiology? Human Genet 2008; 123: 15–33. 122. Wooldridge JM. Chapter 5: Multiple regression analysis – OLS asymptotics. In: Introductory econometrics: a modern
approach. Nashville, TN: South-Western, 2009, pp.167–183. 123. Freeman G, Cowling B and Schooling M. Power and sample size calculations for Mendelian randomization studies. Int J
Epidemiol 2013; 42: 1157–1163. 124. Brion MJ, Shakhbazov K and Visscher P. Calculating statistical power in Mendelian randomization studies. Int J
Epidemiol 2013; 42: 1497–1501. 125. Burgess S. Sample size and power calculations in Mendelian randomization with a single instrumental variable and a
binary outcome. Int J Epidemiol 2014; 43: 922–929. 126. Burgess S, Butterworth A and Thompson SG. Mendelian randomization analysis with multiple genetic variants using
summarized data. Genet Epidemiol 2013; 37: 658–665. 127. Johnson T. Conditional and joint multiple-SNP analysis of GWAS summary statistics identifies additional variants
influencing complex traits. Queen Mary University of London, http://webspace.qmul.ac.uk/tjohnson/gtx/outline2.pdf (2011, accessed 24 July 2015). 128. Pierce B and Burgess S. Efficient design for Mendelian randomization studies: subsample and two-sample instrumental variable estimators. Am J Epidemiol 2013; 178: 1177–1184. 129. Inoue A and Solon G. Two-sample instrumental variables estimators. Rev Econ Stat 2010; 92: 557–561. 130. Angrist JD and Krueger AB. The effect of age at school entry on educational attainment: an application of instrumental variables with moments from two samples. J Am Stat Assoc 1992; 87: 328–336. 131. Schunkert H, Ko¨ nig I, Kathiresan S, et al. Large-scale association analysis identifies 13 new susceptibility loci for coronary artery disease. Nature Genet 2011; 43: 333–338. 132. Morris A, Voight B, Teslovich T, et al. Large-scale association analysis provides insights into the genetic architecture and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. Nature Genet 2012; 44: 981–990. 133. Burgess S, Scott R, Timpson N, et al. Using published data in Mendelian randomization: a blueprint for efficient identification of causal risk factors. Eur J Epidemiol 2015; 30: 543–552. 134. Borenstein M, Hedges LV, Higgins JPT, et al. Chapter 34: Generality of the basic inverse-variance method. Introduction to meta-analysis. Wiley, 2009. 135. Burgess S, Thompson SG and CCGC (CRP CHD Genetics Collaboration). Methods for meta-analysis of individual participant data from Mendelian randomization studies with binary outcomes. Stat Meth Med Res 2016; 25: 272–293. 136. Han C. Detecting invalid instruments using L1-GMM. Econ Lett 2008; 101: 285–287. 137. Bowden J. Median based estimation for Mendelian randomization with multiple instruments. MRC Biostatistics Unit, http://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/SimpleWeightedMedian.pdf (2015, accessed 24 July 2015). 138. Kang H, Zhang A, Cai T, et al. Instrumental variables estimation with some invalid instruments, and its application to Mendelian randomisation. J Am Stat Assoc 2015; available online before print. 139. Kang H, Cai T and Small D. Robust confidence intervals for causal effects with possibly invalid instruments. arXiv 2015: 1504.03718. 140. Kang H. sisVIVE: Some invalid some valid instrumental variables estimator; R package version 1.1, http://cran.rproject.org/package=sisVIVE (2015, accessed 24 July 2015).

Burgess et al.

2355

141. Bowden J, Davey Smith G and Burgess S. Mendelian randomization with invalid instruments: effect estimation and bias detection through Egger regression. Int J Epidemiol 2015; 44: 512–525.
142. Egger M, Smith GD, Schneider M, et al. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. Br Med J 1997; 315: 629–634.
143. Ru¨ cker G, Schwarzer G, Carpenter JR, et al. Treatment-effect estimates adjusted for small-study effects via a limit metaanalysis. Biostatistics 2011; 12: 122–142.
144. Kolesa´ r M, Chetty R, Friedman J, et al. Identification and inference with many invalid instruments. J Business Econ Stat 2015; 33: 474–484.

