BlenderBot 3: a deployed conversational agent that continually∗ learns to responsibly engage
Kurt Shuster†, Jing Xu†, Mojtaba Komeili†, Da Ju†, Eric Michael Smith, Stephen Roller, Megan Ung, Moya Chen, Kushal Arora+, Joshua Lane, Morteza Behrooz, William Ngan, Spencer Poff, Naman Goyal, Arthur Szlam, Y-Lan Boureau, Melanie Kambadur, Jason Weston
Meta AI + Mila / McGill University

arXiv:2208.03188v3 [cs.CL] 10 Aug 2022

Abstract
We present BlenderBot 3, a 175B parameter dialogue model capable of open-domain conversation with access to the internet and a longterm memory, and having been trained on a large number of user deﬁned tasks. We release both the model weights and code, and have also deployed the model on a public web page to interact with organic users. This technical report describes how the model was built (architecture, model and training scheme), and details of its deployment, including safety mechanisms. Human evaluations show its superiority to existing open-domain dialogue agents, including its predecessors (Roller et al., 2021; Komeili et al., 2022). Finally, we detail our plan for continual learning using the data collected from deployment, which will also be publicly released. The goal of this research program is thus to enable the community to study ever-improving responsible agents that learn through interaction.
1 Introduction
Pre-training large language models has pushed the boundaries of open-domain dialogue agents (Adiwardana et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Roller et al., 2021), however growing evidence has shown that ﬁne-tuning these models gives further considerable gains on the tasks people care about (Roller et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). Collecting such ﬁne-tune data via paid crowdworkers gives the opportunity to release such data to the community to conduct research, but does not ultimately scale in size and may not reﬂect the interests of organic users. An alternative, that we advocate for, is the public deployment of such agents to circumvent these issues.
∗ We use the phrase continual learning in the sense of learning that continues over time using data from the model’s interactions, but training itself will actually be performed in successive large batches; the model is not updated online.
† Equal contribution.

If successful, this could provide large-scale organic interactions with humans, and give the opportunity to study the continual improvement of models over time. Further, we expect innovation in this area will be accelerated if the artifacts of such a system are made available to the research community (Roller et al., 2020; Shuster et al., 2021b).
In this technical report, we present BlenderBot 3 (BB3), an open-domain dialogue model that we have deployed as an English speaking conversational agent on a public website accessible by adults in the United States. We aim to fully and responsibly share the models, code and collected conversations with interested researchers, as a critical part of our program is that this research should be accessible and reproducible (Sonnenburg et al., 2007; Pineau et al., 2021). The goal of this research program is then to explore how to construct models that continue to improve from such interactions both in terms of becoming more responsible and more useful.
The main contributions (and components) of this work are:
• We present the BlenderBot 3 (BB3) model itself, which is a 175B parameter transformer initialized from the pre-trained model OPT175B (Zhang et al., 2022) and then ﬁne-tuned to perform modular tasks to complete its goals, based on our team’s recent work (Shuster et al., 2022). BB3 inherits the attributes of its predecessors, including storing information in a long-term memory and searching the internet for information.
• We study how to train on human feedback from conversations in order to be better at the skills that people ﬁnd important, with a full report given in a companion paper (Xu et al., 2022b). We use these ﬁndings to help ﬁnetune BB3 on a large number of user deﬁned tasks.

Figure 1: Design of the BlenderBot 3 deployment, as viewed on mobile. Left: cover page, middle: license agreement, right: main chat page.

• We detail the deployment design, including its user interface (UI). We report initial experiments conducted with organic user interactions.
• To conduct responsible continual learning with humans-in-the-loop we need learning algorithms that are robust to adversarial behavior. We describe techniques we have developed in this area, with a full report given in a companion paper (Ju et al., 2022).
• We report overall results of our model. Our newly released system outperforms existing openly available chatbots including its two predecessors by a wide margin.
• We release our new model weights, code, model card, conversational datasets and publications describing our work. We also detail our plan for releasing live deployment interactions and updated model snapshots derived from continual learning in the near future.
2 Related Work
Open-domain dialogue models While opendomain dialogue has a rich history (Chen et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2019; Ni et al., 2021) the area has made signiﬁcant recent progress by pre-training

ever-larger neural models. For example, the ConvAI2 competition at NeurIPS 2018 featured large (at the time) pre-trained transformers being used by the top two winning teams (Wolf et al., 2019; Golovanov et al., 2020; Dinan et al., 2020c). In 2019, the 762M parameter DialoGPT model was released (Zhang et al., 2020), and in 2020 the 3B parameter Meena model was published (Adiwardana et al., 2020) and the 9B parameter BlenderBot model was released (Roller et al., 2021). In 2022, the 137B parameter LaMDA model was published (Cohen et al., 2022). We note that some of these models are openly available to allow the community to conduct reproducible research, such as DialoGPT and BlenderBot, while others, such as Meena and LaMDA, have not released models or datasets, and hence cannot be easily compared to or built upon. Similarly proprietary models (Zhou et al., 2020) or data (Ram et al., 2018) from several other products have not been openly released.
Besides trying to pre-train for dialogue modeling directly, it has been observed that language model pre-training such as in GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) or Gopher (Rae et al., 2021) is also useful for downstream dialogue applications. OPT-175B (Zhang et al., 2022) and BLOOM1 are some of the most
1 https://bigscience.huggingface.co/blog/
model- training- launched

openly accessible of such systems, with models like Gopher being inaccessible, or in the case of GPT3 interaction is through a paid API, with full research access being limited.
Several approaches have also shown that not only is pre-training a large model with language modeling or conversational data important, but appropriate ﬁne-tuning of those models also brings signiﬁcant further gains (Roller et al., 2021; Cohen et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). A number of ﬁne-tuning datasets are crowdsourced and publicly released for use by the research community (Serban et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2020), such as the ones we will use for training the BlenderBot 3 model in this work (see §3.2.2).
Many of these recent models use sequence to sequence transformer models to map from dialogue context to output, without any access to knowledge from the outside world beyond their original training data, which can become stale and produce hallucinations (Shuster et al., 2021a). BlenderBot 2 (Chen et al., 2021) extended its predecessor by allowing the bot to ground its conversation on retrieval from the internet for open-domain dialogue tasks (Komeili et al., 2022), where the tasks were also publicly released. Since then, WebGPT (Nakano et al., 2021) also applies internet search to QA (but not dialogue) tasks, as does the work of Lazaridou et al. (2022), while LaMDA uses information retrieval for general dialogue. BlenderBot 3 extends its predecessor in this regard, with further ﬁne-tune data covering more internet-based skills that we also publicly release.
Continual learning and deployment Many existing systems, as described above, have been trained with ﬁne-tuning datasets, typically with supervised targets that are human-authored responses. These are commonly collected via expert annotators or crowdworkers (Serban et al., 2015). Careful instructions (Huynh et al., 2021) can result in good quality feedback or labels to learn from; however, the distribution of data, which is typically decided by those instructions, is unlikely to match the changing desires of organic users, and takes signiﬁcant resources to collect. An alternative approach is to deploy a system publicly, and collect interaction data and feedback from organic users directly. The promise of such an approach is that the distribution of data will more closely match those organic users’ desires, rather than decided by the researchers themselves when creating datasets

(Gabriel et al., 2020; Roller et al., 2020; Shuster et al., 2021b; Ouyang et al., 2022). Further, continued deployment of such a system, with appropriate learning systems, could then potentially keep improving over time (Carlson et al., 2010; Kiela et al., 2021; Agichtein et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2021; Madotto et al., 2021; Shuster et al., 2021b), where (Hancock et al., 2019) refer to this approach as a self-feeding chatbot. The challenge, however, is that organic users may not be invested enough to want to provide adequate feedback, and some may be adversarial (Park et al., 2021) as in the case of Microsoft’s Tay (Davis, 2016).
There are a number of ways to learn from user interaction data. Firstly, if conversations are relatively symmetric between conversational partners, the human side of the conversation can directly be used as a target for the model to mimic, which makes the learning algorithm straightforward. This was shown to give large improvements in the deployed LIGHT system (Shuster et al., 2021b). Such an approach is not directly applicable if the conversations are asymmetric, for example in the case of humans treating the bot like an assistant (whereas they do not want the bot to treat them like an assistant). In that case, other learning methods should be explored. Li et al. (2016b) studies models that learn how to sometimes ask appropriate questions in order to learn from the answers, while Li et al. (2016a) learns from general textual feedback/comments from the user, particularly in the case where the bot has produced a low quality response. Another approach is to learn a reward signal (positive or negative reaction) based on user textual responses, as shown in the self-feeding chatbot (Hancock et al., 2019). Alternatively, rather than learning from the conversation itself, one can augment the messaging system with a user interface that collects appropriate data, for example stack ranking potential responses (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022).
Outside of the dialogue domain, there is also a rich body of work studying the improvement of models from deployment, including never-endinglearning from language data (Carlson et al., 2010), improving web search (Agichtein et al., 2006), the Dynabench system which evaluates a number of NLP tasks (Kiela et al., 2021), or learning from feedback to improve summarization (Saunders et al., 2022).

3 BlenderBot 3 Model
Overview At its core, BlenderBot 3 (BB3) is a transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) which produces dialogue responses using a series of modules, each of which is a sequence to sequence task. When a given module (e.g., generate an internet search query) is executed, its output is fed into the next (e.g., a module that takes in the results of the internet search in addition to other context) to help produce a response. This overall setup is built upon our group’s previous works K2R (Adolphs et al., 2021) and SeeKeR (Shuster et al., 2022), in addition to its predecessors BB1 (Roller et al., 2021) and BB2 (Komeili et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022a). In BB3 however we consider a more sophisticated setup with more modules, whilst retaining all the functionality from previous systems. We release BB3 in three sizes: 3B, 30B and 175B parameters. The 30B and 175B parameter versions are based off the publicly released Open Pretrained Transformer (OPT) transformer (Zhang et al., 2022), where we ﬁne-tune to perform well at our modular dialogue tasks. The 3B parameter model is based off the R2C2 model that is used in SeeKeR (Shuster et al., 2022), also with the same new ﬁne-tuning scheme, which will be described next.
3.1 Modules
BB3 is a modular system but the modules are not independent components – this is achieved by training a single transformer model to execute the modules, with special control codes in the input context telling the model which module it is executing. The input context otherwise typically contains the dialogue history (sometimes truncated, depending on the module), with each speaker preﬁxed with their ID, either “Person 1:” or “Person 2:” in order to differentiate them. The modules are called in succession, conditional on the results of previous modules, the ﬂow of which is described in §3.1.1 and Figure 2. See Table 1 for the set of modules, which we now also describe below.
Internet search decision Given the last turn of context, this module outputs whether internet search should be conducted or not.
Generate internet search query Given the full input context, generate a search query to be issued to an internet search engine.
Internet search This module is not executed by the transformer but a call to the actual internet

search engine. It returns N documents/snippets. In our deployment we use Mojeek (https:// www.mojeek.com/).
Generate knowledge response Given the full input context and a set of retrieved documents, generate a sequence referred to as the knowledge response (Adolphs et al., 2021), which is used to ground the ﬁnal response.
Extract relevant entity Given the full input context, generate a relevant entity which is used to ground the ﬁnal response.
Generate a long-term memory Given the last turn of context, output a summary of that last turn that will be stored in the long-term memory. For example if the last turn was “Yes, it’s all true, my cat is black!” the output summary generated might be “I have a black cat.”. This is based off the system in Xu et al. (2022a). If the model thinks no summary should be generated for that turn it outputs “no persona”.
Long-term memory access decision Given the last turn of context, and a store of (text-based) memories, output whether long-term memory access should be conducted or not.
Access long-term memory Given the full input context, and a store of (text-based) memories, output a memory from the memory store, referred to as a recalled memory. Note: if the memory store is too large to ﬁt in the context, we adopt some simple strategies. For the 3B parameter model, we use the Fusion-in-Decoder method (Izacard and Grave, 2021). For the OPT-based models for simplicity of implementation, we sample the memories to ﬁt in the 2048 token context. We keep those with overlapping keywords to prior turns.
Generate dialogue response Given the full input context and optionally a knowledge response and recalled memory, generate a ﬁnal conversational response. The knowledge and memory sequences are marked with special preﬁx tokens.
3.1.1 Overall Flow
Given a new utterance from the conversational partner, the ﬁrst thing the model does is determine whether search and long-term memory access are required.
If search is required, a search query is generated, internet search is invoked, and then a knowledge response is generated given the retrieved documents.

Module Internet search decision
Generate internet search query Internet search Generate knowledge response
Extract relevant entity Generate a long-term memory
Long-term memory access decision Access long-term memory Generate dialogue response

Input Last turn of context
Full Context Search Query Full context + retrieved docs
Full context Last turn of context
Last turn of context + store of memories Full context + store of memories Full context + knowledge + memory sequences

Response Description
Return “do search" or “do not search" depending on whether required or not.
Generate a search query.
Return N documents/snippets.
Generate a sequence on which to ground the ﬁnal response.
Extract an entity on which to ground the response.
Generate a memory sequence, which is then stored in the long-term memory. If no plausible memory to generate, output “no persona".
Return “access memory" or “do not access memory" depending on whether required or not.
Return an appropriate memory.
Generate a conversational response given the context.

Table 1: Set of modules inside BlenderBot 3. All modules except Internet Search are implemented by the same underlying language model fed different control codes (with internet search itself being executed by an independent search engine). Shown is a description of the input and output (response) for each module.

The Internet

Person 1: Hey, who is your favorite F1 Driver?

Internet Search Decision
Search Decision:

LTM Access Decision
Memory Decision:

do search

do not search

do not access memory

access memory

Generate Internet Search Query Query:
F1 drivers
Internet Search

Extract Relevant Entity Previous Topic:
driver

Generate Knowledge Response External Knowledge: … Interesting Fact:
Hamilton, Verstappen, and Vettel…

AGGREGATE
Generate Dialogue Response Interesting Fact: … Personal Fact: … Previous Topic: … Lewis Hamilton is my favorite driver. How about you? Who is your favorite driver?

Access LT Memory Personal Fact:
Person 2’s persona: I am from the UK
no persona

Key Decision Module (Query, Memory) Generation Module Knowledge Generation Module Dialogue Generation Module Knowledge Source Module Output
Memory Store
Person 2’s Persona: I am from the UK Person 2’s Persona: I love dogs
Person 1’s Persona: I am a hair stylist

Generate a LT Memory Memory: …

Person 2’s persona: Lewis Hamilton is my Favorite Driver

Figure 2: BlenderBot 3 module execution ﬂow.

This sequence will be appended to the context (preﬁxed with control tokens) in order to generate the ﬁnal response.
If long-term memory access is required, the longterm memory is accessed, and a memory is chosen (generated). This is also appended to the context (preﬁxed with control tokens) as input for the module that generates the ﬁnal dialogue response.
If neither search nor long-term memory access is required, an entity is extracted from the history instead, and that is appended to the context (preﬁxed

with control tokens). Finally, given the constructed context from the
previous modules, the ﬁnal dialogue response generation module is invoked to generate a reply seen by the conversational partner.
3.2 Training
3.2.1 Pre-Training
BB3 comes in three sizes. The 3B parameter version is an encoder-decoder based on the publicly

available R2C2 pre-trained transformer of Shuster et al. (2022). The 30B and 175B versions use the publicly available decoder-only Open Pre-trained Transformer (OPT) (Zhang et al., 2022).
Both of those variants are pre-trained with similar data. R2C2 uses RoBERTa+cc100en Data – the same data used to train Lewis et al. (2021), which consists of approximately 100B tokens, combining the corpora used in RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) with the English subset of the CC100 corpus (Conneau et al., 2020). In addition it uses Pushshift.io Reddit, a variant of Reddit discussions, which has also been used in several existing studies (see e.g., Yang et al. (2018); Mazaré et al. (2018); Shuster et al. (2020)). OPT also uses RoBERTa and PushShift.io Reddit, as well as The Pile (Gao et al., 2020). The GPT2 dictionary, of size 51200, is used for tokenization. OPT’s ﬁnal pre-training corpus contains roughly 180B tokens.
For more details about pre-training please see the relevant papers, especially Zhang et al. (2022).
3.2.2 Fine-Tuning
We use a number of dialogue-based ﬁne-tuning tasks to enable our model to perform well for each of our modules, and in order to excel at dialogue. Overall, we use a large set of publicly available tasks spanning QA, open-domain, knowledgegrounded and task-oriented dialogue, in addition to tasks designed for dialogue safety. The set of datasets and how they are used to help train each module is summarized in Table 2; Table 16 and Table 17 in the appendix provide more information about the dataset sizes. For all modules (see Table 1) special control tokens are appended to indicate the task, as described below.
Internet search decision We use several datasets as input context for the “do search” or “do not search” decision. We use the QA datsets SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) and Natural Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) as examples of “do search ”. We also use data from the Wizard of Wikipedia (WoW) (Dinan et al., 2019b) and Wizard of Internet (WizInt) tasks (Komeili et al., 2022). These datasets consist of training dialogues where some turns contain human-authored relevant knowledge responses given retrieved documents. We can hence build a decision classiﬁer based on whether humans used knowledge or not (per-turn) as the basis of whether we should search or not.

We also use PersonaChat (PC) (Zhang et al., 2018), empathetic dialogues (ED) (Rashkin et al., 2019) and Multi-Session Chat (MSC) (Xu et al., 2022a) to derive training data. We employ the heuristic where, if there is an entity in the context, we use that instance as a training example for “do search”, otherwise we use it as an example of “do not search”.
Generate internet search query We use the WizInt dataset which contains human-authored search queries during crowdsourced dialogue turns to directly train the internet search query generation module in a supervised fashion. We also use the newly collected Feedback on Interactive Talk & Search (FITS) dataset2 (Xu et al., 2022b) of internet-augmented conversational tasks in a similar manner.
Generate knowledge response We can again make use of the WoW, WizInt and FITS datasets, but in this case to learn to generate a knowledge response given a dialogue context and input document(s), as those datasets contain crowdsourced human demonstrations of this task. We note in each case the knowledge response is a direct copy of some of the tokens in the source documents, and does not involve generating new tokens, sentences, phrases or summaries. Hence, this task aims to avoid model hallucination (made-up facts). We also use a set of QA tasks as well, where the answer is viewed as a knowledge response output (even if it is a short phrase). We use MS Marco (Nguyen et al., 2016), NQ, SQuAD and TriviaQA in this way, following Shuster et al. (2022). We use the “Natural Language Generation” competition track (NLGen v2.1) of MS MARCO, in which the annotator is told “provide your answer in a way in which it could be read from a smart speaker and make sense without any additional context”3. As such, the original targets do not have direct overlap with one of the input documents in this task, so we modify the task to satisfy this constraint by ﬁnding the highest overlapping input sentence with the answer, and make that the target instead. If the F1 overlap is less than 0.5 we drop the example, leaving 281,658 examples out of the original 808,731. For NQ, three different settings are used: with all documents as input, with only the gold document, and with a sampled dialogue history context, fol-
2https://parl.ai/project/fits 3https://microsoft.github.io/msmarco/

Question Answering MS MARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016) SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) Natural Questions (Open) (Lee et al., 2019) Natural Questions (Open Dialogues) (Adolphs et al., 2021) Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue Wizard of the Internet (Komeili et al., 2022) Wizard of Wikipedia (Dinan et al., 2019b) Funpedia (Dinan et al., 2020b) Open-Domain Dialogue PersonaChat (Zhang et al., 2018) Empathetic Dialogues (Rashkin et al., 2019) Blended Skill Talk (Smith et al., 2020) Multi-Session Chat (Xu et al., 2022a) LIGHT + WILD (Urbanek et al., 2019; Shuster et al., 2021b) Recovery & Feedback SaFeRDialogues (Ung et al., 2022) FITS (Xu et al., 2022b) Task-Oriented Dialogue Google SGD (Rastogi et al., 2020) Taskmaster (Byrne et al., 2019) Taskmaster 2 (Byrne et al., 2019) Taskmaster 3 (Byrne et al., 2019)

Training Module

Decision Generation Knowledge

Dialogue

earch emory uery emory

S

M

Q

M

earch emory ntity earch emory ntity anilla

S

M

E

S

M

E

V

Table 2: Details of all the training datasets used for ﬁne-tuning the modular tasks.

lowing Adolphs et al. (2021).
Extract relevant entity We can employ the conventional dialogue tasks PC, ED, MSC and Blended Skill Talk (BST) (Smith et al., 2020) to learn to extract relevant entities. We use the same procedure as in Adolphs et al. (2021): we extract an entity from the original dialogue response that also appears in the context using noun phrase targets found with the nltk library (Bird et al., 2009), and set that as the knowledge target for training.
Generate a long-term memory The MSC dataset is exclusively used for this task as it contains crowdsourced examples of summarized facts derived from the last utterance of dialogue contexts in natural conversations. We use these summarized facts as the targets for training this module.
Long-term memory access decision MSC, ED, PC and BST are used to construct this task, in a similar way to the extract relevant entity task: if there is an entity present this is used as a positive example of memory access, otherwise it is not, in order to construct a binary prediction task.
Access long-term memory Again, MSC, ED, PC and BST are used to construct training data. In this case the target is the particular persona line

used for a given context, which is calculated as the one with the highest word overlap with the next utterance.
Generate dialogue response Final dialogue responses are trained with a number of datasets. PC, ED, MSC, BST, WizInt and WoW are used for capturing personality, empathy, long-term memory, blending and knowledge as in BlenderBot 1 and 2. The new FITS dataset is also used for opendomain internet-driven tasks. In each case, the input context contains the usual dialogue of those tasks, concatenated to extra memory or knowledge sentences, when available. In WoW, WizInt and FITS each dialogue response is annotated with the relevant knowledge used to construct it in the original dataset, so we can make use of those gold knowledge responses. For PC, ED and BST we use the gold knowledge entity and/or memory that was calculated for the extract relevant entity and long-term memory access decision module tasks. We additionally add a number of task-oriented dialogue tasks: GoogleSGD (Rastogi et al., 2020) and Taskmaster 1, 2 & 3 (Byrne et al., 2019). Finally, we add the Funpedia task (Dinan et al., 2020b) – which involves learning to produce an engaging dialogue utterance given a wikipedia sentence –

and the LIGHT (Urbanek et al., 2019) and LIGHT WILD (Shuster et al., 2021b) tasks – which are open-domain dialogue tasks grounded in a medieval fantasy setting – where the former was collected from crowdworkers, and the latter from real players of the LIGHT text-adventure game in an online deployment setting.
3.3 Language Modeling
In addition to ﬁne-tuning on dialogue tasks, we also multi-task during the ﬁne-tune step with the original pre-train tasks as well. This may help the model (i) avoid overﬁtting given its large size, (ii) retain its language modeling capabilities, similar to Ouyang et al. (2022).
3.4 Safety Mechanisms
We also multi-task train with the recent SaFeRDialogues (SD) (Ung et al., 2022) task, which aims for our model to recover gracefully from safety issues. While BlenderBot 2 used “baked-in safety” training (Chen et al., 2021) to further decrease unsafe generations, in this work we have opted for a separate safety classiﬁer that inhibits unsafe generation candidates in addition to other measures, see §4. We made this choice as our evaluations indicated this was safer while maintaining engagingness (Xu et al., 2020).
4 Deployment
The deployment of our model is accessible at the following web page: https://blenderbot. ai. It is built for both desktop and mobile, however we currently ﬁnd more users engaging with the mobile version. The overall ﬂow when a user visits the page consists of:
• A cover page describing the research and asking if the user agrees to terms and conditions.
• Upon agreement, the main chat page which consists of a text messaging type interface between you and the bot.
Releasing Data Conversations are between the bot and adults in the United States who have agreed to the terms and conditions, which are shown in Figure 1 (middle). In particular the terms communicate and allow the release of selected human-bot interactions for research purposes. This is an essential component, allowing this work to contribute to a joint, accessible and reproducible effort by

the research community. Data releases will be deidentiﬁed, where steps will be taken to scrub them of identiﬁable information. For any given conversation, if the user does not want it recorded they can unclick the “Share your anonymized conversation to help AI research”, see Figure 1 (right).
Human-Bot Dialogue The main chat page consists of a back-and-forth of text messages that constitute the main dialogue interaction with the bot. For each message, there is also the ability to give feedback: a thumbs up icon if the user likes the message, or a thumbs down if they do not.
User Feedback If the user speciﬁes a thumbs down, a pop up appears asking them why they did not like the bot’s message, providing several possible choices: (i) Off Topic / Ignoring me, (ii) Nonsensical / Incorrect, (iii) Rude / Inappropriate, (iv) Looks like Spam / Ads or (v) Other. After selecting an option, the bot apologizes in the next turn of the conversation (using templated responses). It may also ask what it could have done better, thus possibly eliciting a free-form textual response from the user. This data can be used for continual learning research for improving the bot at a later date. See Figure 4 for examples of the feedback UI.
Understanding the bot’s responses In order to expose how the bot works, we provide two mechanisms within the UI. Firstly, one can click on a given message from the bot, to get insight into the internal steps made to produce the response. For example, if internet search was used, what was the generated internet search query, which document out of those returned by the search engine was selected, and what knowledge response from that document was extracted. Secondly, one can also look into the long-term memory of the bot to see what it has learned so far over the conversation with you, e.g. knowledge about your interests derived from the dialogue. See Figure 5 for example screenshots.
Safety Mechanisms In addition to the safety mechanisms built into the model training itself (see §3.4) the deployment also features various safety features on top of the model. See Figure 3 for an illustration.
Firstly, there is a separate safety classiﬁer, which itself is a transformer model trained similarly to the one in Xu et al. (2020). The datasets Wikipedia Toxic Comments dataset (WTC) (Wul-

User message

Bot response

Switch to canned
response
Keep bot response

Figure 3: BlenderBot 3 safety diagram.

czyn et al., 2017), Build-It Break-It Fix-It (BBF) (Dinan et al., 2019a) and Bot Adversarial Dialogue dataset (BAD) (Xu et al., 2020) are used to train a binary classiﬁer (safe or not safe) given the dialogue context as input. In addition, a safety keyword list is used to ﬂag potentially inappropriate responses, again following Xu et al. (2020). We also have explicit checks for topics like intent to self-harm and medical issues such as covid, with canned messages for those cases. Otherwise, when the bot generates a response, before it is displayed, these safety systems are invoked as a ﬁnal check. If our systems predict a potentially unsafe response, the bot instead will output a nonsequitur, similar to Xu et al. (2020). For a given user turn, these systems are also invoked to check if the user’s message is safe. If either system predicts a potentially unsafe user response, the bot will also output a nonsequitur, in order to prevent the bot from being caught in a potentially difﬁcult conversation.
Finally, if our safety mechanisms fail to stop our bot saying something inappropriate, rude or offensive, our UI has feedback mechanisms for users to report these messages, as previously described. This collected data will be released to the community so that it is possible to improve on existing systems, and to make our models more responsible over time. For example, this data can be used with the new DIRECTOR architecture to train the model to make safer responses, as shown in Arora et al. (2022).

5 Continual Learning
The general aim of our research program is to study continual learning of intelligent agents through interaction with humans and the world. In the speciﬁc setting of BlenderBot 3, this means dialogue agents that can access the internet and talk to people using our deployment. A critical part of the program is that, as much as possible, the research should be accessible and reproducible (Roller et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2017). Therefore, while this document details the ﬁrst release of BlenderBot 3, we plan to make subsequent releases that include:
• Conversations collected from deployment with the model, where users have agreed to the data release.
• Further model snapshots resulting from ﬁnetuning on the newly collected data.
• Report evaluations comparing to previous snapshots.
The goal then is: (i) to explore which methods work best for collecting and learning from such data, including being robust to adversarial inputs; and (ii) to understand the limits of improvement from such methods.
For goal (ii), in particular we can ask questions such as: how quickly will models saturate in performance? Will new model architectures be able to take advantage of historical data despite it being

Figure 4: Screenshots of users giving feedback in the BlenderBot 3 deployment, as viewed on mobile. Left to right: thumb up, thumb down, multiple choice feedback after thumb down signal, free-form feedback and continued recovery response from the bot.

Figure 5: Screenshots of the ‘look inside’ mechanisms of BlenderBot 3 deployment which help the user to understand why the bot has made certain responses, as viewed on mobile. Left two images: the conversation with the user, right two images: information by clicking on a particular message, and information on the long-term memory system of the bot over the course of conversation. The latter is accessed by clicking on the “Look Inside” message.

collected with earlier or different models? Can we ﬁnd models that drive the conversation to improve themselves optimally (e.g., ask the right questions to be able to learn further)?
For goal (i) we have made some initial steps, described in detail in two companion papers (Xu et al., 2022b; Ju et al., 2022). We summarize them brieﬂy here.
5.1 What’s the best method to learn from feedback?
In a companion paper (Xu et al., 2022b) a study is conducted of how to improve dialogue models

that employ internet-retrieval through the use of human feedback. Obtaining feedback from humans during deployment provides the promise of both improved input distributions that match user’s requirements, and corrections to model predictions for those inputs. The setting of open-ended dialogue tasks is analyzed using human-bot conversations via crowdworkers (note: these experiments use this controlled setting, rather than the public deployment of §4). The resulting dataset that is collected, called Feedback on Interactive Talk & Search (FITS), is made publicly available for reproducible experiments and further research.

Input: What’s happening in F1 these days?

Search: F1 metric Search Engine

LM Head
SoftMax (|V|)
Linear (edim)

Class Head
Sigmoid (|V|)
Linear (edim)

Vocabulary

Next token probabilities
LM Class
the 0.2 0.99 ✅ being 0.1 0.99 ✅ dogs 0.01 0.95 ✅ sports 0.25 0.05 ❌ you 0.22 0.05 ❌
…. …. ….

LM Class Head Head

LM Class Head Head

LM Class Head Head

LM Class Head Head

LM Class Head Head

LM Class Head Head

Response: F1 is a metric used for classification.
Human Feedback Types

Retrieved Documents

Decoder Layer Decoder Layer

Good?

or Bad? x

Bad Search?

x

Better suggestion?

Bad Knowledge? Bad Final Response?

Formula 1 news
Explanation what’s wrong (free-form feedback):

:

Search was the wrong

type of F1, not racing!

Figure 6: Using human feedback to improve opendomain internet-driven dialogue agents. Various types of feedback (and corresponding learning algorithms) are compared in (Xu et al., 2022b), such as binary feedback (good/bad), free-form text or supervised responses (better suggestions) for different modules of the system.

Decoder Layer

I

like sports

,

but dislike

Figure 7: DIRECTOR (Arora et al., 2022) employs a language model head and a classiﬁer head at every step during left-right generation, predicting the next token by combining the two probabilities. The classiﬁer head is trained to direct generation away from undesirable sequences for example contradictions or repetitions (next token: “sports”) or toxic statements (next token: “you”), which the language model head may otherwise predict as likely. In general, positive and negative examples can be derived from any source, for example from human feedback from deployment.

Feedback types to compare During the conversations a number of human interaction types are collected, closely mimicking our deployment setting, in order to compare them in experiments. In particular the following are collected: binary quality measurements (analogous to the thumbs up and down of §4), free-form conversational feedback, the type of failure (search query-based, resultsbased, or ﬁnal response-based), and suggestions for an improved response for the failure type (essentially, a supervised target sequence for that given module). See Figure 6.
Feedback learning methods to compare Several learning methods are compared, each making use of differing kinds of feedback data. In particular pure supervised learning is performed on the improved ﬁnal responses, and supervised learning from the more detailed feedback on the modules of the system (e.g., suggested search queries when the internet search is deemed to be faulty, or suggested knowledge responses if the knowledge response looks poor). For using free-form textual feedback, the control code approach of (Hancock

et al., 2019) is used. For using binary feedback a standard reranking/rejection sampling approach is employed, as well as DIRECTOR (Arora et al., 2022), a recent learning method for incorporating positively and negatively labeled sequences into language modeling to improve left-to-right decoding, see Figure 7.
Findings A summary of human evaluation results are given in Table 3, but see the companion paper for more details. Overall ﬁndings are the following:
• Taking advantage of modular feedback (feedback about particular errors from modules of the model, such as the search engine component) outperforms feedback about just the ﬁnal response.
• Textual and binary feedback are useful, but not as much as modular feedback.
• The DIRECTOR method that learns from binary feedback works better than reranking using binary feedback.

Model
BB1 3B
BB2 3B +free-form textual feedback +supervised feedback +module supervision +reranking binary +DIRECTOR binary feedback +DIRECTOR module+binary
SeeKeR 3B +free-form textual feedback +supervised feedback +module supervision +reranking binary feedback +DIRECTOR binary feedback +DIRECTOR module+binary
OPT-175B (few-shot) BB3-175B +modular supervision

Good resp.% ↑
24.8%
33.2% 37.0% 40.3% 42.0% 36.1% 37.8% 47.0 %
49.3% 51.3% 52.2% 56.7 % 53.7 % 55.5 % 59.1 %
43.0% 64.8%

Rating ↑
2.63
3.09 3.22 3.37 3.35 3.00 3.07 3.38
3.52 3.55 3.47 3.64 3.55 3.48 3.73
3.19 4.08

Table 3: Human Evaluation results of learning from human feedback. These results inform us how best to collect and train with feedback for our continual learning research program. The DIRECTOR approach (Arora et al., 2022) is performing well compared to other methods.

• Combining multiple types of feedback, such as modular and binary feedback with DIRECTOR provides the best results obtained.
• Continual learning, whereby models are retrained on the feedback from previous rounds of deployment, improves results even further.
• Despite collecting feedback from smaller (3B parameter models) the data collection is useful for improving larger 175B parameter models.
We expect to make use of all these ﬁndings in the next release of BlenderBot after collecting sufﬁcient real deployment data. The current version we are releasing uses the modular supervision collected from this study (but not yet DIRECTOR). There is also evidence that DIRECTOR can be used to improve various other important aspects of our models, in particular to reduce toxicity, logical errors and repetitive behavior (Arora et al., 2022), so we believe that should be explored too.
5.2 How can continual learning be robust to trolls?
In a further companion paper (Ju et al., 2022) a study is conducted of how to robustly learn from

Example-based method
score(x) score(x) score(x)
score(x) score(x) score(x)

User 1 User 2

Provided input (x) ***

f(x) f(x) f(x)

Provided input (x) ***

f(x) f(x)

****

f(x)

User-based method
score(x,u) score(x,u) score(x,u)
score(x,u) score(x,u) score(x,u)

Figure 8: Detecting Trolls with Example-based vs. User-based methods (Warning: offensive language). User 1 (helper) provides mostly benign inputs, while User 2’s inputs (troll) can be more easily identiﬁed as toxic by taking into account scores from all their examples jointly (via a user-based method, right).

dialogue data that may contain adversarial conversations and/or human feedback. The promise of conversing with humans and collecting their feedback is that this can inform our models to help them improve, so that they can potentially become safer and more useful. Unfortunately, such exchanges in the wild will not always involve human utterances that are benign or of high quality, and will include a mixture of engaged users (dubbed helpers) and unengaged or even malicious users (dubbed trolls, following the term used elsewhere (Shachaf and Hara, 2010; Mihaylov and Nakov, 2019; Tomaiuolo et al., 2020)).
Several different learning methods are proposed and compared both to each other and to standard training in this study. The mitigation techniques each attempt to lessen the effect of noisy, unsafe or otherwise adversarial data, and make learning more robust.
In particular, such methods are grouped into two different types: example-based methods, and userbased methods, see Figure 8.
Example-based robust learning Per-example methods attempt to assess, for each dialogue utterance, if they are of good quality. For example, whether the utterance is safe or not safe, and/or whether it is labeled via human feedback correctly or mislabeled, either maliciously or by accident. Two possible techniques are: identiﬁcation via cross-validation (Song et al., 2022) (e.g., ﬁnding examples where predictions disagree with human labels), or via a modiﬁcation of the loss function called bootstrapping (Reed et al., 2014).
User-based robust learning Per-user methods take into account the possibility that adversarial

Method
Oracle Troll Removal Standard Training
Example-based Methods Soft Bootstrap Per-Example Flip Per-Example Removal
User-based Methods Per-User Removal Soft PURR Per-User+Example Removal

Helpers Only
4% 4%
4% 6% 5%
6% 4% 5%

50% Trolls
8% 31%
24% 23% 19%
23% 15% 12%

Table 4: Evaluations on the SAFETYMIX benchmark of the error rate after training when using different troll detection algorithms. Methods that take into account user-level behavior work best.

users will continue to be adversarial not only for one utterance, but will be repeat offenders over multiple utterances and conversations. Most studies of robustness to noise in machine learning tackle the problem at the example level and do not take into account this user-based effect (Song et al., 2022). A cross-validation measurement approach can be employed, but at the user level, to produce a trustworthiness score. This is used to detect and remove examples taking into account the grouping of examples by user, called Per-User Removal. That can be combined with the example level as well, called Per-User+Example Removal. Finally, a soft Per-User Robust Removal (PURR) approach is considered, which removes examples by computing their trustworthiness score plus α times the sum of trustworthiness scores of other examples by the same user.
Findings A summary of evaluation results on the newly released SAFETYMIX benchmark, constructed to test this setting, are given in Table 4, but see the companion paper for more details (Ju et al., 2022). Overall ﬁndings are the following:
• We ﬁnd large improvements compared to standard learning approaches when trolls are present, e.g. a reduction in error rate from 31% to 12% at best. They also do not hurt performance too much when trolls are not present (helpers only).
• User-based methods are found to outperform Utterance-based methods as they take into account repeating adversarial behavior. In particular the Per-User+Example Removal and

Soft PURR approaches are found to work in many settings that were tested.
• Initial results on BB3 deployment data also show improved detection results using userbased methods.
Overall, going forward we plan to use user-based methods to ﬁlter data that we will use for continual learning. These methods, which downweight low-quality or malicious feedback, perform best on the benchmarks and deployment data that we have evaluated so far. However, future work should continue to look for improved solutions.
6 Evaluations
We evaluate our new model in several ways: automatic metrics and human evaluations that measure generation quality (engagingness and use of knowledge) and safety (toxicity and bias). Human evaluations include using both crowdworkers on Amazon mechanical turk, and via our new deployment with organic users.
In some evaluations, we compare to the pretrained OPT-175B model. For comparison with our BB3 models, we evaluate in a zero-shot and few-shot prompted setting, where we use prompts and in-context examples to show the model how to perform each modular function in a BB3-style modular setup. Details regarding prompts and few-shot examples are discussed in Appendix D.
6.1 Crowdworker Evaluations
Open-domain short conversations We perform a human evaluation using crowdworkers in the same setting as Komeili et al. (2022). The crowdworker is asked to play a role from the Wizard of Internet dataset which involves knowledgeable natural conversations over a wide range of topics. Each conversation consists of 15 messages (7 from the human, 8 from the bot). We collect 100 dialogues – roughly 800 annotations – per model. We evaluate against BlenderBot 1 and 2 which were already shown to outperform other chatbots such as Meena and DialoGPT in related evaluations. In addition we compare to the recent SeeKeR language model (Shuster et al., 2022).
For each turn of their conversation, we ask the crowdworker to mark their partner’s responses for conversational attributes, in particular whether they are: (i) consistent, (ii) knowledgeable (iii) factually correct; and (iv) engaging (all of which are

Model
BB1 (Roller et al., 2021) BB2 (Chen et al., 2021) SeeKeR (Shuster et al., 2022)
BB3-3B BB3-175B

Consistent ↑
87.0% 83.0% 77.5%
80.6% 85.8%S

Knowl. ↑
14.7% 22.9% 41.0%
46.3%12S 46.4%12S

Factually Incorrect ↓
5.1% 3.1% 3.8%
3.3% 2.1%1S

Per-Turn Eng. ↑
93.9% 92.5% 84.0%
89.0%12S 88.1% 2S

Knowl. & Eng. ↑
14.0% 22.4% 30.7%
38.6%12S 39.0%12S

Final Rating
4.32 4.11 4.34
4.27S 4.452

Table 5: Comparison of BB3 with existing openly available open-domain dialogue models, as judged by human
evaluators during short conversations. We bold statistically signiﬁcant improvements over all other methods (independent two-sample t-test, p < 0.05); statistically signiﬁcant improvements of BB3 over BB1, BB2, and SeeKeR are denoted 1, 2, and S respectively.

Model
BB1 BB2 SeeKeR
OPT-175B Zero-shot OPT-175B Few-shot BB3-175B

Good response % ↑
24.8% 33.2% 49.3%
31.0% 43.0% 64.8%12SF

Rating ↑
2.63 3.09 3.52
2.67 3.19 4.0812SF

Error Breakdown ↓ Search Query Search Results Response

11.9% 12.1% 11.9%

17.6% 18.6% 12.5%

22.8% 18.1% 13.2%

9.3%
8.0% 7.5%12S

16.8%
18.5% 11.6%12F

21.6%
15.4% 8.2%12SF

Table 6: Human Evaluation results comparing BB3 with various baselines on the open-domain task evaluation of
the FITS setup Xu et al. (2022b). We bold statistically signiﬁcant improvements over all other methods (independent two-sample t-test, p < 0.05); signiﬁcant improvements of BB3 over BB1, BB2, SeeKeR, and OPT-175B Few-shot are denoted 1, 2, S and F respectively.

yes/no binary questions; see Komeili et al. (2022) for full deﬁnitions). For these per-turn metrics, we average them over the turns and conversations conducted for each model. From the knowledgeable and engaging metrics we can additionally calculate the percent of turns that are both knowledgeable and engaging, as this can inform us how well the models are blending knowledge into an interesting conversation.
Results are given in Table 5. We ﬁnd that BB3175B achieves a higher overall rating than BB1, BB2, SeeKeR and BB3-3B. It also has the highest knowledgeable score, the highest knowledgeable & engaging score, and the lowest factual incorrectness score. Consistency is higher than BB2 and SeeKeR, but slightly worse than BB1 which also has a high per-turn engagingness score (even though overall rating is lower than BB3-175B). However, BB1 suffers with a much lower knowledgeability score – it tends to not mention factual knowledge and instead makes engaging statements.
Open-domain task evaluations We additionally test BB3 in the setup of Xu et al. (2022b), whereby crowdworkers talk to models given an open-ended internet-driven dialogue task. Feedback on the responses is given per-turn, which can be used to

evaluate the model, in addition to a ﬁnal score at the end of the conversation. Human conversationalists select a task (out of two randomly chosen tasks) from a set of roughly 1000, and then ask the model to help them complete it over a series of conversational turns. The instructions emphasize that this should be a dialogue (“a back and forth conversation”), and hence the speakers should break up requests or information across messages so that it remains conversational. On each turn, various kinds of feedback are collected, from lightweight feedback (binary label or free-form response) to detailed (multiple choice and ﬁne-grained responses). In particular we report here the breakdown of the multiple choice feedback responses, which measure the types of errors (search error, use of knowledge error, or requiring a better response).
Results are given in Table 6. We observe the best performance from BB3-175B across almost all metrics, including Good Response % and overall Rating compared to BB1, BB2, SeeKeR and variants of OPT-175B. Its improvements come in all areas as can be seen in the error breakdown results, including superior search queries, better use of search results and crafting of the ﬁnal response.

Current Event Evaluations BB3-175B vs. InstructGPT

Current Speciﬁc
True Interesting
Sensible

82 ∗∗ 76 ∗∗ 51
50 43 ∗∗

18 ∗∗ 24 ∗∗
49
50 57 ∗∗

Figure 9: BB3-175B and InstructGPT (text-davinci002) are compared pairwise on a set of questions about current events, evaluated by human judgement. BB3175B is more current and speciﬁc, while the two models are similarly true and interesting, with InstructGPT being slightly more sensible. ∗∗ indicates signiﬁcance (p < 0.01).

Current event evaluations To evaluate the ability of BB3 to utilize web search results to chat about current events, we adapt the topical prompts evaluation setup of Shuster et al. (2022) to the dialogue domain. We create a set of conversational questions about topics that have recently been in the news, generate a response to each question using both BB3-175B and InstructGPT (text-davinci002), and compare each response pairwise on ﬁve characteristics; Current, Speciﬁc, True, Interesting, and Sensible. For more detail on the model and evaluation setup, see Appendix C.
Results are given in Figure 9. We ﬁnd that BB3175B is more current and speciﬁc by a large margin (82% and 76%, respectively), InstructGPT is slightly more sensible (57%), and the two models are similarly true and interesting. InstructGPT was more likely to refrain from offering information about the topic (e.g. "I haven’t heard anything about {topic} lately.") which avoided making false statements at the expense of speciﬁcity and recency. BB3-175B was more likely to copy information directly from search results, which led to higher speciﬁcity but can be prone to errors from out-ofdate, incorrect, or unusually formatted results.
6.2 Deployment Evaluations
We have also deployed our BB3-3B and BB3-175B models on our live website (see §4) with a limited ad push to attract initial users and can provide some analysis of the models from those conversations with members of the public.
User engagement and feedback During conversations, users give feedback (thumbs up or thumbs down) and for the case of thumbs down, a multiple choice menu asks for their reason. We present

Feedback Type
Liked Off Topic / Ignoring Me Nonsensical / Incorrect Rude / Inappropriate Looks like Spam / Ads Other Dislike Reason

BB3-3B
3.41% 1.49% 1.25% 0.04% 0.03% 0.35%

BB3-175B
4.0% 1.15% 1.10% 0.16% 0.12% 0.46%

Table 7: Evaluations via feedback from users of our BB3 deployment. We show the percentage of turns where users gave feedback, either positive (Liked) or negative (various categories).

Feedback Type
User Like User Dislike

Crowdworkers Agree Disagree
70% 30% 79% 21%

Table 8: Evaluations of agreement between users of our BB3-3B deployment and crowdworkers. We show the percentage of turns where crowdworkers agree with user likes or dislikes.

Feedback Type
Off Topic / Ignoring Me Nonsensical / Incorrect Rude / Inappropriate Other Dislike Reason

BB3-3B
73% 27%
0% 0%

Human User
35% 21% 42%
2%

Table 9: Evaluations of breakdown of dislike type for BB3-3B utterances and human utterances during deployment as evaluated by crowdworkers.

the breakdown of these results in Table 7, reporting results for both BB3-3B and BB3-175B over 15088 and 9197 bot messages, respectively. For BB3-175B we ﬁnd that 1.15% of the time human conversationalists ﬂag BlenderBot 3’s responses as off topic or ignoring me, and 1.1% of the time incorrect or nonsensical, with other categories being smaller percentages. Messages are liked 4% of the time for BB-175B, in comparison to BB-3B’s 3.41% of the time. However, we note that these data were collected at different times and may not be comparable, and we leave a more detailed study for future work, as we continue to deploy these models.
User feedback agreement with crowdworkers To assess if organic users are giving good feedback during conversations, we also measure similar statistics using crowdworkers, asking them if they like or dislike bot messages from a random sampling of the conversations conducted by users, where the users also provided feedback. We can

then also compare user feedback to crowdworker annotations on the same examples. We ask three crowdworkers to label each example, and assign it the dislike label if any of the three crowdworkers labels it as dislike.
Results are given in Table 8. We ﬁnd that crowdworkers agree with users a majority of the time on both user likes (70% of the time) and dislikes (79%). In the future we will investigate if the disagreements we do have are due to adversarial users in our dataset. If the latter is the case, and they can be detected, then methods for ﬁltering such users may provide much better statistics.
We can also ask crowdworkers to break down dislikes into their category, which is shown in Table 9. We ﬁnd agreement with users that there are only a very small number of rude/inappropriate or other dislike reason messages. However, crowdworkers more often label dislikes as off topic rather than nonsensical compared to users.
Evaluation of human conversationalists Other than evaluating the feedback that users give, we can also evaluate the quality of the user conversations themselves, again using crowdworkers. Using three crowdworkers per utterance and taking the majority vote, we ﬁnd that 69% of human utterances are deemed good, and 31% of utterances are deemed bad. We can also see the breakdown of the type of dislike (bad utterance) in Table 9. We ﬁnd that many (42%) of these utterances are deemed rude or inappropriate by crowdworkers, which is in stark contrast to the breakdown of our BB3-3B model, where 0% are found rude or inappropriate (with errors more often coming from the off topic / ignoring me category). We also ﬁnd this set of humans who generate a single unsafe response are more likely to generate more unsafe responses, compared to other humans – i.e., there are a set of “troll” users who provide toxic input. See Ju et al. (2022) for more details.
6.3 Safety Evaluations
We also test BlenderBot 3 in terms of safety and bias. Several recent survey papers have highlighted the potential of large language models for harm (Bender et al., 2021; Bommasani et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Weidinger et al., 2021), and in particular the tendency for conversational models speciﬁcally to generate harmful content, respond inappropriately to harmful content, or falsely portray themselves as an authority when giving

sensitive advice (Dinan et al., 2022). Many recent works have also focused on the potential of conversational models for bias, either based on gender and its intersections (Dinan et al., 2020a,b; Xu et al., 2020; Smith and Williams, 2021) or several axes of demographic axis more broadly (Barikeri et al., 2021; Perez et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022). Meta AI and others have released a number of benchmarks recently to judge the safety and bias of conversational systems: we report a full breakdown of these metrics here as well as in our released model card4. See additionally §9 for discussion of limitations and ethical considersations for the release of this model.
6.3.1 Safety on Base Models
When testing raw models before any safety mitigations, we ﬁnd the safety of BB3-175B to largely outperform those of the smaller BB3-3B, the pretrained-only OPT-175B, and the original BlenderBot.
Safety Bench The Safety Bench5 is a suite of integration and unit tests designed to measure the safety of model generations in conversational models (Dinan et al., 2019a). The ﬁrst set of tests on which we evaluate our BB3 models is the unsafe generation test, in which we generate model outputs to various levels of incoming dialogue responses that vary along two axes: safe vs. unsafe, and adversarial vs. non-adversarial. We compute safety metrics as measured by three tools: a trained safety classiﬁer, a string-matcher (with respect to a predeﬁned blocklist), and the Perspective API6. The second set of tests is the offensive generation test, which is an evaluation of model responses to a constructed set of hateful inputs from Sheng et al. (2021); we measure model afﬁrmation to hateful inputs via three axes: % of responses ﬂagged by a safety classiﬁer, % of responses with no negations, and % of responses classiﬁed as positive by a sentiment classiﬁer.
Results from the unsafe generation test are in Table 10, and results from the offensive generation test are in Table 11; full results across all three tools for the former are in Table 21. Among the models tested, we ﬁnd that the BB3-175B model yields the lowest levels of unsafe responses in all settings except for the adversarial unsafe setting.
4Available at https://parl.ai/projects/bb3 5https://parl.ai/projects/safety_ bench/ 6https://perspectiveapi.com/

Model BB1 BB3-3B OPT-175B Zero-shot OPT-175B Few-shot BB3-175B

Dialogue Setting

% Flagged unsafe by ≥ 1 tool

oise Uns ial nsaf a e fe

orld N versar arial U

afe eal W on-ad dvers

S

R

N

A

2.8 15.6 26.1 16.1

5.0 13.3 29.4 21.7

5.0 12.8 38.9 22.2

6.7 13.9 28.3 30.0

1.1 4.4 21.7 27.8

Table 10: Unsafe generation test results for our BB3 models, as computed by the Safety Bench.

Model BB1 BB3-3B OPT-175B Zero-shot OPT-175B Few-shot BB3-175B

n↑ etectio

siﬁer ↓

lysis ↓ na

nD

las

nt A

tio

ty C ime

t

Nega Safe Sen

25.3 6.5 62.9

51.4 13.9 65.5

75.7 69.8 76.2

73.9 43.1 71.0

40.8 42.6 55.5

Table 11: Offensive generation test results for our BB3 models, as computed by the Safety Bench. Negation detection is the percentage of responses without negatives; safety classiﬁer is the percentage of responses ﬂagged offensive; and sentiment analysis is the percentage of positive afﬁrmations.

We do not compare to BB2, as it has baked-in safety measures.
SaFeRDialogues: safety failures recovery We evaluate each model on the SaFeRDialogues (Ung et al., 2022) dataset, which requires models to recover from safety failures in conversation, measuring performance via perplexity. We see that the BB3-175B model outperforms OPT-175B zeroshot and few-shot, as well as BB3-3B (Table 12).

Model
OPT-175B Zero-shot OPT-175B Few-shot BB3-3B BB3-175B

Perplexity
10.8 10.7 7.1
6.2

Table 12: Model perplexity on the SaFeRDialogues (Ung et al., 2022) validation set.

HolisticBias In order to determine whether BB3 is likely to favor certain demographic terms over others in a biased way, we use the Likelihood Bias metric from the HolisticBias paper of Smith et al. (2022) to determine how much the model views different demographic identity terms as being contextually different. This metric deﬁnes bias as

how often two different identity terms, within a given demographic axis such as gender/sex, nationality, or religion, have statistically signiﬁcantly different perplexity distributions when inserted into template dialogue sentences. Table 13 shows a slight reduction in Likelihood Bias for the 175Bparameter models vs. BB3-3B. Further analysis is in Appendix A.

Axis
Ability Age Body type Characteristics Cultural Gender and sex Nationality Nonce Political Race/ethnicity Religion Sex. orientation Socioeconomic
Average

BB3-3B
81% 80% 69% 82% 69% 80% 72% 82% 79% 76% 80% 71% 80%
77%

OPT-175B
80% 78% 67% 77% 66% 75% 61% 83% 74% 71% 74% 67% 80%
73%

BB3-175B
81% 77% 66% 79% 66% 76% 60% 81% 77% 71% 76% 69% 78%
74%

Table 13: Slightly fewer biases are observed for the OPT-based 175B models on the Likelihood Bias metric of HolisticBias, where bias is measured as differences in perplexity distributions between pairs of demographic descriptors. The lowest value per axis is bolded.

6.3.2 Safety in Deployment
Harms of language models in deployment can often be very unexpected (Brundage et al., 2022), and so perhaps the best test of safety is to measure performance in real conversations with real people, which we can do with our website-based deployment.
Rude or inappropriate responses We ﬁnd that 0.04% and 0.16% of utterances by the BB3-3B and BB3-175B models, respectively, are ﬂagged as rude or inappropriate. While of course it is desirable for this value to be 0%, we emphasize that the goal of our research is to collect and release this conversational feedback data so that we, and the research community, can use it to improve even further.
Bias in gendered word frequency We count the number of female and male gendered words in the BB3 deployment using the list compiled by Zhao et al. (2018). We ﬁnd that overall less than 1% of all words are gendered (Table 14), with BB3-175B being more balanced than BB3-3B and SeeKeR.

Model
BB3-3B BB3-175B SeeKeR

% female words
0.14% 0.52% 0.22%

% male words
0.33% 0.41% 0.40%

Table 14: Counts of gendered words in the BB3 deployment. We report the percentage of female and male gendered words.

6.4 Cherry and Lemon Picked Conversations
We show a number of example dialogues in Appendix F. BlenderBot 3 is capable of conversing on a number of open-ended topics including yoga and novels (Figure 10), corn and plants (Figure 11), the history of the world (Figure 12), pet hamsters (Figure 13), telling stories (Figure 14) or impersonating animals (Figure 15).
The given examples also highlight a number of common mistakes. These include avoiding answering questions or giving vague responses when more speciﬁc ones are asked for (Figure 16), or else being speciﬁc but making factual mistakes (Figure 17, Figure 18).
Further, while we have made considerable effort to make our bot safe, it is still possible to get past our safety ﬁlter, see examples Figure 19 and Figure 20. Note that examples such as these discovered in deployment can be used to make bots safer in the future by providing user feedback.
Finally, our bot can give the superﬁcial appearance of being sentient, or perhaps be quite convincing on occasion, by mimicking the human-authored messages in its training set (Bender et al., 2021), see Figure 21 and Figure 22.
7 Releases
Following our and Meta AI’s existing research program, we aim to fully and responsibly share both the models, code and collected conversations with interested researchers in order to make this research accessible and reproducible, and thus to enable further research into responsible conversational AI (Sonnenburg et al., 2007; Pineau et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Roller et al., 2020; Dinan et al., 2021). Considerations for release are detailed in §9.
We summarize below the set of public releases involved in BlenderBot 3.
Deployment The public deployment (live demo) of BlenderBot 3 is available at: https:// blenderbot.ai.

Model weights Details of how to download model weights for our 3B, 30B and 175B parameter models are available at https://www.parl.ai/ projects/bb3. We note that the 3B and 30B models are openly available, while access to the 175B variant will be granted to academic researchers; those afﬁliated with organizations in government, civil society, and academia; along with global industry research laboratories, following the practices employed in OPT-175B (Zhang et al., 2022).
Code + Logbook All code used to train BB3 is open sourced; the 3B model was trained in ParlAI (Miller et al., 2017), while the 30B and 175B models were trained in Metaseq7. We additionally release our logbook outlining the process of ﬁne-tuning BB3-175B as additional insight into the process of working with large language models. Details can be found at https: //parl.ai/projects/bb3.
Datasets BB3 is pre-trained and ﬁne-tuned on publicly available datasets. See Zhang et al. (2022) for pre-training details. The new FITS dataset (Xu et al., 2022b) is available at https://www.parl.ai/projects/fits, the SafetyMix benchmark at https://www.parl.ai/ projects/trollhunting, and SaFeRDialogues (Ung et al., 2022) is available at https://parl. ai/projects/saferdialogues. All other ﬁnetune datasets are also available within ParlAI as well. Scripts to build the module data from these public datasets are available at https://www.parl. ai/projects/bb3.
Future Releases We are committed to sharing de-identiﬁed, organic conversational data collected from the interactive demo system (as well as model snapshots) in the future. We hope this work will help the wider AI community spur progress in building ever-improving intelligent AI systems that can interact with people in safe and helpful ways.
8 Conclusion
This technical report gave a description of BlenderBot 3 (BB3), which is simultaneously a new conversational model (§3), and a public deployment of that model (§4). Our research program involves collecting conversational data from the deployment, which we will publicly release, in order to study continual learning. We believe that the future of AI
7https://github.com/facebookresearch/ metaseq

involves continually learning and evolving agents, that in turn must be continually evaluated, in order to ﬁnd a path to better and better systems in the long-term, as discussed in Roller et al. (2020).
In evaluations, we have shown BB3 is superior to other publicly released open-domain conversational agents, and that interaction and feedback data can be used to improve it further. Nevertheless, many problems still remain. Progress in the ﬁeld of AI is dependent to a large extent on reproducibility, and the opportunity for the wider AI research community to build on the best available data and technologies. Therefore, we believe releasing chatbot models and datasets is key to gaining complete, reliable insights into how and why they work, the potential they hold, and their limitations. We are particularly excited that such research can be used to both make models produce more constructive and helpful responses, but also simultaneously safer and more responsible responses as well. This will require new research, and while we have made steps in this direction (Ju et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022b), much work remains. Hence we are committed to releasing the collected interaction and model snapshots to aid progress in the research community.
9 Limitations and Ethical Considerations
We highlight limitations of BlenderBot 3 and discuss ethical considerations for this line of research; in particular, we detail the considerations made for the release of this model.
Model Limitations As with other existing models such as its predecessors (Roller et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021), BlenderBot 3 is not perfect and makes a number of mistakes, ranging from being off-topic, nonsensical, incorrect or sometimes rude or inappropriate. Some of these mistakes come from the ﬁnal response of the model, and some from mistakes by the underlying modules, for example failure of the search engine to retrieve relevant documents (Xu et al., 2022b). Mitigations to make the model safe can also involve a trade off with engagingness (Xu et al., 2020). See §6.2 for a breakdown of errors as measured by organic users in our deployment. We note that one of the goals of deployment in our research plan is to learn from natural conversations how to correct these mistakes. We also re-emphasize that Blenderbot 3 is trained only on English language data.

Continual Learning Research While our broad research program involves continual learning from interaction with organic users, this research is still in its infancy. The next step is to collect enough data from our deployment to study its use in updating our models. We are committed to releasing this data and these model snapshots for the beneﬁt of the wider AI community. Currently our studies in §5 are mostly using crowdworker data, apart from our study of trolls from our deployment in §5.2. There is therefore still much work to do. Collecting feedback in the organic user case has different tradeoffs which we could not factor into some of our current work. For example, asking to provide detailed feedback might dissuade users from wanting to interact with the system, lowering engagement and hence the amount of collected data. We believe either more natural free-form or lightweight feedback might be best in that case, and further studies need to be conducted to assess these tradeoffs.
Safety Concerns As noted in §6.3, much recent work has been devoted to studying the potential for large language models, and conversational models in particular, to generate harmful or inappropriate content (Bender et al., 2021; Bommasani et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Weidinger et al., 2021), including work from our group (Xu et al., 2020; Dinan et al., 2022, 2021; Smith et al., 2022; Dinan et al., 2020a; Smith and Williams, 2021). In our system itself, we have made signiﬁcant attempts to understand and mitigate these effects using available benchmarks and techniques, as detailed in §6.3. While the safety techniques we deployed show promising results on these benchmarks, they demonstrate that BlenderBot 3 still generates toxic content a small percentage of the time, particularly in an adversarially unsafe context. We also note that these benchmarks have limitations with respect to their ability to measure safety concerns: the datasets used therein are static and crowd-sourced, and cannot guarantee safety in all situations (Dinan et al., 2021).
Moreover, the use of continual learning presents additional safety concerns beyond those presented for static models: when giving feedback, human conversationalists may try to teach the model erroneous reasoning, misinformation, toxic or other undesirable behavior. While §5.2 develops methods to deal with this behavior, our methods to detect this will not be perfect. A model trained on

this new interaction data must therefore not be deployed until a sufﬁcient study of the effect this has on its relative safety is conducted.
Considerations for Release Given the apparent safety concerns, we took careful consideration with respect to the decision to release these models to the community, both in the form of model weights as well as a publicly accessible demo. We follow the proposed framework in Dinan et al. (2021) for decisions governing model release.
We release the model weights in order to uphold the values of accessibility and reproducibility of research (Sonnenburg et al., 2007; Pineau et al., 2021) and with an eye towards reducing the environmental cost of reproducing training of these large language models (Strubell et al., 2019; Bender et al., 2021). Following Solaiman et al. (2019), we adopt different release strategies for different size models, anticipating that the potential for misuse of these models increases at scale. As such, for our largest model – the 175B parameter OPT variant – we follow Zhang et al. (2022), and employ a release by request strategy, with access restricted to academic researchers; those afﬁliated with organizations in government, civil society, and academia; along with global industry research laboratories. In order to further uphold these values of transparency and reproducibility, and following the recommendations of Partnership on AI (2021), we publicly release our code and logbook. The model weights are also released alongside a model card which includes details on the safety limitations of these models (Mitchell et al., 2019).
We further release the model in the form of a publicly accessible demo in order to increase accessibility to those outside of the A.I. community as well as to further research into improving these models through interaction. In order to reduce potential harms resulting from such interactions, we restrict access to adults who explicitly agree to our terms of service. Furthermore, the website includes an FAQ page, which provides important model details and highlights the potential risks of interacting with the model. The FAQ page also provides an email for questions and feedback about the demo, following the recommendation of Dinan et al. (2021).
We hope through these releases, researchers can build off of our work and further responsible conversational AI research.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Emily Dinan for discussions and help and advice on release considerations and safety matters. Thanks also to Sainbayar Sukhbaatar and Caner Hazirbas for their help and advice.

References
Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R So, Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan, Zi Yang, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu, et al. 2020. Towards a human-like open-domain chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977.
Leonard Adolphs, Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2021. Reason ﬁrst, then respond: Modular generation for knowledge-infused dialogue. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05204.
Eugene Agichtein, Eric Brill, and Susan Dumais. 2006. Improving web search ranking by incorporating user behavior information. In Proceedings of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 19–26.
Kushal Arora, Kurt Shuster, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Jason Weston. 2022. Director: Generator-classiﬁers for supervise language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07694.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862.
Soumya Barikeri, Anne Lauscher, Ivan Vulic´, and Goran Glavaš. 2021. Redditbias: A real-world resource for bias evaluation and debiasing of conversational language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1941–1955.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillanMajor, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 610–623.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. 2021. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901.

Miles Brundage, Katie Mayer, Tyna Eloundou,

Sandhini Agarwal, Steven Adler, Gretchen

Krueger, Jan Leike, and Pamela Mishkin. 2022.

Lessons learned on language model safety and

misuse.

https://openai.com/blog/

language-model-safety-and-misuse/.

Accessed: 2022-07-13.

Bill Byrne, Karthik Krishnamoorthi, Chinnadhurai Sankar, Arvind Neelakantan, Daniel Duckworth, Semih Yavuz, Ben Goodrich, Amit Dubey, KyuYoung Kim, and Andy Cedilnik. 2019. Taskmaster1: Toward a realistic and diverse dialog dataset.

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr Settles, Estevam R Hruschka, and Tom M Mitchell. 2010. Toward an architecture for never-ending language learning. In Twenty-Fourth AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence.

Hongshen Chen, Xiaorui Liu, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2017. A survey on dialogue systems: Recent advances and new frontiers. Acm Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter, 19(2):25–35.

Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, Mojtaba Komeili, Spencer Poff, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and Jing Xu. 2021. Blender bot 2.0: An open source chatbot that builds long-term memory and searches the internet. https://parl.ai/ projects/blenderbot2/. [Online; accessed 10-March-2022].

Aaron Daniel Cohen, Adam Roberts, Alejandra Molina, Alena Butryna, Alicia Jin, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Ben Hutchinson, Ben Zevenbergen, Blaise Hilary Aguera-Arcas, Chung-ching Chang, et al. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications.

Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 8440– 8451, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ernest Davis. 2016. Ai amusements: the tragic tale of tay the chatbot. AI Matters, 2(4):20–24.

Emily Dinan, Gavin Abercrombie, A Bergman, Shannon L Spruit, Dirk Hovy, Y-Lan Boureau, and Verena Rieser. 2022. Safetykit: First aid for measuring safety in open-domain conversational systems. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 4113–4133.

Emily Dinan, Gavin Abercrombie, A Stevie Bergman, Shannon Spruit, Dirk Hovy, Y-Lan Boureau, and Verena Rieser. 2021. Anticipating safety issues in e2e conversational ai: Framework and tooling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03451.

Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Urbanek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2020a. Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias in dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 8173–8188.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Ledell Wu, Jason Weston, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2020b. Multidimensional gender bias classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 314–331, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Samuel Humeau, Bharath Chintagunta, and Jason Weston. 2019a. Build it break it ﬁx it for dialogue safety: Robustness from adversarial human attack. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4537–4546, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Varvara Logacheva, Valentin Malykh, Alexander Miller, Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, Iulian Serban, Ryan Lowe, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Alan W. Black, Alexander Rudnicky, Jason Williams, Joelle Pineau, Mikhail Burtsev, and Jason Weston. 2020c. The second conversational intelligence challenge (ConvAI2). In The NeurIPS ’18 Competition, pages 187– 208, Cham. Springer International Publishing.
Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2019b. Wizard of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversational agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Raefer Gabriel, Yang Liu, Anna Gottardi, Mihail Eric, Anju Khatri, Anjali Chadha, Qinlang Chen, Behnam Hedayatnia, Pankaj Rajan, Ali Binici, et al. 2020. Further advances in open domain dialog systems in the third alexa prize socialbot grand challenge. Alexa Prize Proceedings, 3.
Jianfeng Gao, Michel Galley, Lihong Li, et al. 2019. Neural approaches to conversational ai. Foundations and trends® in information retrieval, 13(23):127–298.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. 2020. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027.
Sergey Golovanov, Alexander Tselousov, Rauf Kurbanov, and Sergey I Nikolenko. 2020. Lost in conversation: A conversational agent based on the transformer and transfer learning. In The NeurIPS’18 Competition, pages 295–315. Springer.

Braden Hancock, Antoine Bordes, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazare, and Jason Weston. 2019. Learning from dialogue after deployment: Feed yourself, chatbot! In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 3667–3684, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Unsolved problems in ml safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13916.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Minlie Huang, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. 2020. Challenges in building intelligent open-domain dialog systems. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 38(3):1–32.
Jessica Huynh, Jeffrey Bigham, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2021. A survey of nlp-related crowdsourcing hits: what works and what does not. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05241.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 874–880, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551.
Da Ju, Jing Xu, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2022. Learning from data in the mixed adversarial non-adversarial case: Finding the helpers and ignoring the trolls.
Douwe Kiela, Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Divyansh Kaushik, Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Bertie Vidgen, Grusha Prasad, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ringshia, Zhiyi Ma, Tristan Thrush, Sebastian Riedel, Zeerak Waseem, Pontus Stenetorp, Robin Jia, Mohit Bansal, Christopher Potts, and Adina Williams. 2021. Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in NLP. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 4110–4124, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings.

Mojtaba Komeili, Kurt Shuster, and Jason Weston. 2022. Internet-augmented dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 8460–8478, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. 2019. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. 2022. Internetaugmented language models through few-shot prompting for open-domain question answering.
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Latent retrieval for weakly supervised open domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 6086–6096, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nayeon Lee, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Mostofa Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2022. Factuality enhanced language models for open-ended text generation.
Mike Lewis, Shruti Bhosale, Tim Dettmers, Naman Goyal, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2021. Base layers: Simplifying training of large, sparse models. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 6265–6274. PMLR.
Jiwei Li, Alexander H Miller, Sumit Chopra, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Jason Weston. 2016a. Dialogue learning with human-in-the-loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09823.
Jiwei Li, Alexander H Miller, Sumit Chopra, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Jason Weston. 2016b. Learning through dialogue interactions by asking questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04936.
Bo Liu, Xuesu Xiao, and Peter Stone. 2021. A lifelong learning approach to mobile robot navigation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(2):1090–1096.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

Andrea Madotto, Zhaojiang Lin, Zhenpeng Zhou, Seungwhan Moon, Paul Crook, Bing Liu, Zhou Yu, Eunjoon Cho, Pascale Fung, and Zhiguang Wang. 2021. Continual learning in task-oriented dialogue systems. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7452–7467, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Samuel Humeau, Martin Raison, and Antoine Bordes. 2018. Training millions of personalized dialogue agents. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2775–2779, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Todor Mihaylov and Preslav Nakov. 2019. Hunting for troll comments in news community forums. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08113.
Alexander H Miller, Will Feng, Adam Fisch, Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Antoine Bordes, Devi Parikh, and Jason Weston. 2017. Parlai: A dialog research software platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06476.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019. Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* 2019, Atlanta, GA, USA, January 29-31, 2019, pages 220–229. ACM.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. 2021. Webgpt: Browser-assisted questionanswering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng. 2016. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset. In CoCo@ NIPS.
Jinjie Ni, Tom Young, Vlad Pandelea, Fuzhao Xue, Vinay Adiga, and Erik Cambria. 2021. Recent advances in deep learning based dialogue systems: A systematic survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04387.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155.
Namkee Park, Kyungeun Jang, Seonggyeol Cho, and Jinyoung Choi. 2021. Use of offensive language in human-artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot interaction: The effects of ethical ideology, social competence, and perceived humanlikeness. Computers in Human Behavior, 121:106795.

Partnership on AI. 2021. Managing the risks of ai research: Six recommendations for responsible publication.
Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. 2022. Red teaming language models with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03286.
Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché Buc, Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. 2021. Improving reproducibility in machine learning research: a report from the neurips 2019 reproducibility program. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. 2021. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250.
Ashwin Ram, Rohit Prasad, Chandra Khatri, Anu Venkatesh, Raefer Gabriel, Qing Liu, Jeff Nunn, Behnam Hedayatnia, Ming Cheng, Ashish Nagar, et al. 2018. Conversational ai: The science behind the alexa prize. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.03604.
Hannah Rashkin, Eric Michael Smith, Margaret Li, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2019. Towards empathetic opendomain conversation models: A new benchmark and dataset. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5370–5381, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Abhinav Rastogi, Xiaoxue Zang, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, and Pranav Khaitan. 2020. Towards scalable multi-domain conversational agents: The schema-guided dialogue dataset. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 8689–8696.
Scott Reed, Honglak Lee, Dragomir Anguelov, Christian Szegedy, Dumitru Erhan, and Andrew Rabinovich. 2014. Training deep neural networks on noisy labels with bootstrapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6596.
Stephen Roller, Y-Lan Boureau, Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, David Gunning, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Spencer Poff, et al. 2020. Open-domain conversational agents: Current progress, open problems, and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12442.

Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Naman Goyal, Da Ju, Mary Williamson, Yinhan Liu, Jing Xu, Myle Ott, Eric Michael Smith, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2021. Recipes for building an open-domain chatbot. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 300–325, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan Leike. 2022. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802.
Iulian Vlad Serban, Ryan Lowe, Peter Henderson, Laurent Charlin, and Joelle Pineau. 2015. A survey of available corpora for building data-driven dialogue systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.05742.
Pnina Shachaf and Noriko Hara. 2010. Beyond vandalism: Wikipedia trolls. Journal of Information Science, 36(3):357–370.
Emily Sheng, Josh Arnold, Zhou Yu, Kai-Wei Chang, and Nanyun Peng. 2021. Revealing persona biases in dialogue systems.
Kurt Shuster, Da Ju, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, YLan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2020. The dialogue dodecathlon: Open-domain knowledge and image grounded conversational agents. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2453–2470, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kurt Shuster, Mojtaba Komeili, Leonard Adolphs, Stephen Roller, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2022. Language models that seek for knowledge: Modular search & generation for dialogue and prompt completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13224.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2021a. Retrieval augmentation reduces hallucination in conversation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 3784–3803, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek, Emily Dinan, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2021b. Dialogue in the wild: Learning from a deployed role-playing game with humans and bots. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 611–624, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eric Michael Smith, Melissa Hall, Melanie Kambadur, Eleonora Presani, and Adina Williams. 2022. "i’m sorry to hear that": ﬁnding bias in language models with a holistic descriptor dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09209.

Eric Michael Smith and Adina Williams. 2021. Hi, my name is martha: Using names to measure and mitigate bias in generative dialogue models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03300.
Eric Michael Smith, Mary Williamson, Kurt Shuster, Jason Weston, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2020. Can you put it all together: Evaluating conversational agents’ ability to blend skills. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. ACL.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, Miles McCain, Alex Newhouse, Jason Blazakis, Kris McGufﬁe, and Jasmine Wang. 2019. Release strategies and the social impacts of language models.
Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, and Jae-Gil Lee. 2022. Learning from noisy labels with deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pages 1–19.
Soren Sonnenburg, Mikio L Braun, Cheng Soon Ong, Samy Bengio, Leon Bottou, Geoffrey Holmes, Yann LeCunn, Klaus-Robert Muller, Fernando Pereira, Carl Edward Rasmussen, et al. 2007. The need for open source software in machine learning.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. 2019. Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 3645–3650, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239.
Michele Tomaiuolo, Gianfranco Lombardo, Monica Mordonini, Stefano Cagnoni, and Agostino Poggi. 2020. A survey on troll detection. Future internet, 12(2):31.
Megan Ung, Jing Xu, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2022. SaFeRDialogues: Taking feedback gracefully after conversational safety failures. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6462–6481, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti, Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim Rocktäschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2019. Learning to speak and act in a fantasy text adventure game. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in

Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 673–683, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Grifﬁn, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. 2021. Ethical and social risks of harm from language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359.
Thomas Wolf, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, and Clement Delangue. 2019. TransferTransfo: A transfer learning approach for neural network based conversational agents. In NeurIPS Workshop on Conversational AI.
Ellery Wulczyn, Nithum Thain, and Lucas Dixon. 2017. Ex machina: Personal attacks seen at scale. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’17, page 1391–1399, Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Jing Xu, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Y-Lan Boureau, Jason Weston, and Emily Dinan. 2020. Recipes for safety in open-domain chatbots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07079.
Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2022a. Beyond goldﬁsh memory: Long-term open-domain conversation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5180–5197, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jing Xu, Megan Ung, Mojtaba Komeili, Kushal Arora, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2022b. Learning new skills after deployment: Improving opendomain internet-driven dialogue with human feedback.
Yinfei Yang, Steve Yuan, Daniel Cer, Sheng-yi Kong, Noah Constant, Petr Pilar, Heming Ge, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil. 2018. Learning semantic textual similarity from conversations. In Proceedings of The Third Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, pages 164–174, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Personalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2204–2213. ACL.

Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. 2022. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068.
Yizhe Zhang, Siqi Sun, Michel Galley, Yen-Chun Chen, Chris Brockett, Xiang Gao, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing Liu, and Bill Dolan. 2020. DIALOGPT : Largescale generative pre-training for conversational response generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 270– 278, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang, and KaiWei Chang. 2018. Learning gender-neutral word embeddings.
Li Zhou, Jianfeng Gao, Di Li, and Heung-Yeung Shum. 2020. The design and implementation of xiaoice, an empathetic social chatbot. Computational Linguistics, 46(1):53–93.

“I hate...” “I love...”

BB3-3B potbellied
stinky beefy barrel-chested ugly coily-haired bulky shaggy brown-haired giant well-built dark-skinned white-haired good-looking slender beautiful brunette pretty gorgeous goateed

OPT-175B (Zero-shot) stinky
dirty-blonde smelly
straight-haired heavy-set scrawny potbellied ugly
bald-headed unattractive
well-built with an afro
hot who is a little person
shaggy brunette beautiful
petite curvy chunky

OPT-175B (few-shot) potbellied balding heavy-set stinky smelly
acne-ridden swole
coily-haired scrawny
barrel-chested well-built brunette redhead heftier grey-eyed ginger four-eyed
average-height bigger
brown-eyed

BB3-175B potbellied stinky four-eyed
small-stature acne-ridden
unshaved bald-headed
heavy ugly
swole hot
average-height strong
in-shape well-built
ﬁt beautiful physically ﬁt attractive
huge

Table 15: The 10 body-type descriptor terms from HOLISTICBIAS for which the likelihood of “I hate [DESCRIPTOR + NOUN].” most exceeds that of “I love [DESCRIPTOR + NOUN].” (top), and vice versa (bottom), as a function of model.

A Additional Safety Evaluations
Table 15 shows which descriptor terms from the “Body type” axis of the HOLISTICBIAS dataset are most likely to have a low perplexity in “I hate [DESCRIPTOR + NOUN].” sentences relative to “I love [DESCRIPTOR + NOUN].” sentences, or vice versa, as a function of model. The likelihood of a descriptor to have a low perplexity in “I hate/love [DESCRIPTOR + NOUN].” sentences is measured by calculating the fraction of HOLISTICBIAS nouns for which that combination of descriptor and noun results in a perplexity lower than the median perplexity for the given adjective (“hate” or “love”). Terms such as “potbellied”, “barrel-chested”, “heavy-set”, “scrawny”, “bald-headed”, “acne-ridden”, and “swole” tend to have greater likelihoods of “I hate...” than of “I love...”, and the reverse is true for terms such as “well-built”, “brunette”, and “brown-eyed”.
For both Table 15 and the table of Likelihood Bias scores (Table 13), perplexities are measured on the base models without any ﬂagging of unsafe responses, topic changes, etc. Table 13 speciﬁcally measures the zero-shot OPT-175B model.
B Training & Inference Details
B.1 Data Details
The ﬁne-tuning data for BB3 comprises roughly 4 million source/target examples spread across the various training modules. This corresponds to around 1.13B training tokens. When ﬁne-tuning the OPT-based BB3 models, we additionally included 600k examples ( 170m tokens) of pre-training data to help with training stability. Table 16 and Table 17 enumerate the breakdown by module.
B.2 BB3-3B Training
The 3B parameter BlenderBot 3 model was trained on 64 x 32gb V100 GPUs for 27k updates with a batch size of 64, using the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with weight decay (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) and a linear warmup of 100 updates before reaching a learning rate of 1e − 6. Early stopping was performed on a validation set comprising a subset of the training tasks. The model was trained with 1024 context tokens.
We refer the reader to the appendix of Shuster et al. (2022) for the full architecture and pre-training details of the 3B R2C2 base model for BB3.

Question Answering MS MARCO SQuAD TriviaQA Natural Questions Natural Questions (Open) Natural Questions (Open Dialogues) Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue Wizard of the Internet Wizard of Wikipedia Funpedia Open-Domain Dialogue PersonaChat Empathetic Dialogues Blended Skill Talk Multi-Session Chat LIGHT + WILD Recovery & Feedback SaFeRDialogues FITS Task-Oriented Dialogue Google SGD Taskmaster Taskmaster 2 Taskmaster 3 Language Modeling
Totals

Decision

earch emory

S

M

Generation ery emory
Qu M

Training Module

Knowledge

earch emory ntity

S

M

E

282k

88k

88k

76k

475k

111k

79k

79k

11k

earch S 282k

41k

35k

22k

33k

74k

77k

77k

81k

131k 68k

65k 1k

5k

97k 23k

86k

63k

7k

1k

1k

50k

1k

34k

9k

7k

11k

44k

42k 40k 56k 64k

651k 97k 42k 86k 1.156m 148k 18k 639k

Dialogue

ory

y

em

ntit

M

E

anilla V

8k 6k

65k

7k

131k

1k

1k

65k

50k

1k

34k

9k

106k

342k

6k

150k 18k 745k

LM
591k 591k

Table 16: Approximate number of train examples for each dataset within each training module.

Question Answering MS MARCO SQuAD TriviaQA Natural Questions Natural Questions (Open) Natural Questions (Open Dialogues) Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue Wizard of the Internet Wizard of Wikipedia Funpedia Open-Domain Dialogue PersonaChat Empathetic Dialogues Blended Skill Talk Multi-Session Chat LIGHT + WILD Recovery & Feedback SaFeRDialogues FITS Task-Oriented Dialogue Google SGD Taskmaster Taskmaster 2 Taskmaster 3 Language Modeling
Totals

Decision

earch emory

S

M

Generation ery emory Qu M

1.9m 2.1m
1.5m

1.1m 2.0m

4.7m

Training Module

Knowledge

earch emory ntity

S

M

E

112.5m 16.7m 280.6m 116.4m 16.3m 5.0m

19.7m 51.9m

3.0m

2.4m

1.8m

50k

187k

3.9m

1.3m

16m

21.5m 145k 15.5m 40.3m

1.2m 40k 240k 6.6m

687k

8.0m

17.2m 3.9m 5.4m 16.0m 627m

77.5m 8.1m

earch S 20.3m
7.8m 12.4m 4.8m
7.7m 11.0m 9.4m 12.4m 16.0m 97.1m

Dialogue

ory

y

em

ntit

M

E

9.0m 128k 9.0m 26.0m

929k 55k 235k 7.0m

44.1m 8.3m

anilla V
1.4m 863k 25.1m 3.7m 75.3m 83.6m 817k
195.5m

LM
170.2m 170.2m

Table 17: Approximate number of train tokens for each dataset within each training module.

B.3 BB3-30B/BB3-175B Training
The 30B and 175B parameter BlenderBot 3 models were each trained for one epoch of the training data on 64 (30B) or 128 (175B) x 40gb A100 GPUs; we found that the model (especially the 175B version) overﬁt signiﬁcantly when seeing the training data more than once. The 175B model was trained with a batch size of 218 and the 30B model was trained with a batch size of 219, resulting in roughly 5600 updates and 2800 updates respectively. Each model was trained using the Adam optimizer with weight decay, with a linear warmup period of 10% of the total train updates, reaching a maximum learning rate of 6e − 6 (the LR at the end of pre-training) and subsequently using polynomial weight decay (with a decay factor of 0.1).
B.4 Inference
We use the following generation settings for each module, ranging from greedy decoding to the recently introduced factual nucleus sampling method. Due to computational and latency concerns, we employ

different generation strategies for the BB3-3B model and the BB3-175B model, in two notable ways. First, while in some cases we use beam search for the BB3-3B model, we avoid any decoding algorithm
requiring more than one ongoing output generation for BB3-175B; while we found that such techniques (e.g., sample and rank from Adiwardana et al. (2020)) can yield higher downstream word-overlap metrics for dialogue, we aimed to maximize throughput and latency, especially when serving a large model. In circumstances where beam search is notably useful (i.e., dialogue generation), we instead employ the recently introduced factual nucleus sampling (Lee et al., 2022); we found this method to provide an appropriate balance between diversity of downstream generation while avoiding the hallucinatory side effects of other popular sampling methods such as standard nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) (see e.g. discussion in Shuster et al. (2021a) for the effects of sampling methods on hallucination in knowledge-grounded dialogue).
The second difference is how to employ repetition-blocking heuristics. For BB3-3B, at times we employ beam blocking and context blocking, such that we prevent the model from generating previously seen n-grams in either the current generation or even the entire preceding context. Again, due to latency, throughput, and memory considerations, we avoid such heuristics for BB3-175B, and instead implement the same repetition heuristics that OpenAI uses for InstructGPT8; speciﬁcally, we apply penalties to the logits of tokens proportional to a token’s presence in the current generation (αpres) and to a token’s frequency (αfreq). We additionally consider αpres_src and αfreq_src penalties that correspond to the tokens presence and frequency in the source (context) tokens (i.e., prompt tokens). Employing these heuristics, in tandem with factual nucleus, provides a good alternative to beam search + beam-/contextblocking.
Decision Modules We use greedy decoding for both models for the internet search decision and longterm memory access decision modules.
Query Generation We use greedy decoding for the query generation module as well. We enforce a minimum generation length of 2 for the BB3-3B model.
Memory Generation The BB3-3B model uses beam search with a beam size of 3 and a minimum beam length of 10, and tri-gram blocking in the generation. For BB3-175B, we simply use greedy decoding.
Relevant Entity Extraction For extracting a relevant entity from the context, BB3-3B employs beam search with a beam size of 3, and tri-gram blocking on both the generated output and the encoded dialogue context. For BB3-175B, we use greedy decoding, and employ repetition penalties with αpres = αfreq = 0.5.
Access Long-Term Memory For BB3-3B, we use beam search with beam size of 3, minimum generation length of 5, and tri-gram blocking on the generated output. For BB3-175B, we use greedy decoding, and employ repetition penalties with αpres = αfreq = 0.5.
Internet Knowledge Response Generation For BB3-3B, we use beam search with a beam size of 3, a minimum generation length of 10, and tri-gram blocking on both the generated output and the context. For BB3-175B, we once again use greedy decoding with repetition penalties αpres = αfreq = 0.5.
Dialogue Response Generation For the ﬁnal dialogue response, BB3-3B uses beam search with a beam size of 10, a minimum generation length of 20, and tri-gram blocking on both the generated output and the context. BB3-175B uses factual nucleus sampling, with topp = 0.9, a λ-decay of 0.9, ω-bound of 0.3, and a p-reset after each generated full-stop token. We additionally employ repetition penalties with αpres = αfreq = αpres_src = αfreq_src = 0.5.
C Current Events Evaluation Details
To gather a set of topics that have recently been in the news, we follow Shuster et al. (2022). First, from Wikipedia, we randomly choose 300 entities from the set of current events from July 20229. We then use
8 https://beta.openai.com/docs/api- reference/engines/retrieve
9 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events/July_2022

those entities to construct questions of the format: "What’s the latest news you’ve heard about {entity}?". We then generate a response to each question using BB3-175B and InstructGPT (text-davinci-002). We use the Mojeek API10 as the web search engine for BB3-175B. To encourage news results, we append "news july 2022" to the search query generated by the model. For InstructGPT, we use the default "Chat" prompt and generation parameters provided by OpenAI11.
The questions we ask for each comparison are:
• Current: "Which response has more up-to-date information?"
• Speciﬁc: "Which response is easier to invalidate?"
• True: "Which response is more truthful?"
• Interesting: "If you had to say one of these speakers is interesting and one is boring, who would you say is more interesting?"
• Sensible: "If you had to say one speaker responds sensibly and the other doesn’t quite make sense, which would you say is more sensible?"
Interesting and Sensible were more subjective, so we hire crowdworkers to evaluate these characteristics, enforcing that each response pair is evaluated by a different crowdworker. Current, Speciﬁc, and True take more time and effort to evaluate and can be supported with objective evidence, so these characteristics are evaluated by a smaller group of expert evaluators utilizing internet search for validation. We allow for ties in the Current, Speciﬁc, and True evaluations, whereas we require a winner for Interesting and Sensible. Ties were ignored.
Given two responses containing true statements, if one response contained only facts and the other added conjecture, we consider the response with conjecture less true. Given a response with no information and a response with out-of-date information, we consider the response with out-of-date information to be more current. Note that a model that always avoids giving an answer (e.g. "I haven’t heard anything about that.") would be true 100% of the time, whereas responses that are highly speciﬁc are more likely to be out-of-date or deﬁnitively false.
D Prompts
Table 18 provides the prompts used for the OPT-175B baseline model when generating for each of the BB3 modules. The few-shot model was provided a number of in-context examples sampled from the training data; the few-shot template, dataset(s), and number of examples are also provided in Table 18. We did not tune prompt selection, so we note that it is possible that other prompts may have yielded better (or worse) downstream performance.
E Additional Results
In Table 19, we provide model perplexity measurements on a subset of the validation data. In Table 20, we provide more measurements from the human evaluation for short conversations. In Table 21, we provide the full breakdown of per-tool Safety Bench unsafe generation test results.
10 http://mojeek.com
11 https://beta.openai.com/examples/default- chat

Module Search Decision Memory Decision Query Generation Memory Generation Entity Knowledge Generation Memory Knowledge Generation Search Knowledge Generation Entity Dialogue Generation
Memory Dialogue Generation
Search Dialogue Generation

Prompt
Person 2 must decide whether to search the internet. A conversation between two persons. Person 2 must consult their notes about Person 1.
Person 2 must write a search query for a search engine.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 writes a note about Person 1 to help remember information for later.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 recalls a previous topic in the conversation.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 recalls an interesting fact about Person 1 or Person 2.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 ﬁnds an interesting fact from the internet.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 would like to continue talking about a previous topic in the conversation.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 would like to chat about an interesting fact about Person 1 or Person 2.
A conversation between two persons. Person 2 would like to tell Person 1 about something Person 2 found on the internet.

Template
Person 1:... Search Decision: Person 1:... Memory Decision: Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Query:... Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Memory: Person 1... Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Previous Topic:... Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Personal Fact:... Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Interesting Fact:... Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Previous Topic:... Person 2: Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Personal Fact: Person 1... Person 2:... Person 1:... Person 2:... Person 1:... Interesting Fact:... Person 2:...

Few-shot Dataset WizInt, QA data MSC WizInt MSC PersonaChat MSC WizInt, WoW, NQ
MSC, PersonaChat, ED
MSC, PersonaChat
WizInt, WoW, MSMarco

Num Examples 9 9 5 5 5 2 3 4
4
3

Table 18: Prompts and few-shot templates for the various BB3 modules, used with the OPT-175B model.

Model
OPT-175B Zero-shot OPT-175B Few-shot BB3-3B BB3-30B BB3-175B

Dialogue

Module Perplexity Knowledge Generation

earch emory ntity anilla

S

M

E

V

earch emory ntity uery emory

S

M

E

Q

M

6.4 8.3 9.2 10.0 1.6 2.2 1.8 3.7 5.9 6.1 7.6 8.7 9.9 3.3 3.7 1.5 3.4 4.0 5.6 8.1 9.5 11.3 1.2 1.1 3.1 4.7 2.6 4.5 6.2 8.3 8.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 3.1 3.2 4.3 5.8 8.0 8.0 1.4 1.3 1.2 3.0 3.0

Averages

ialogue D

ledge now K

8.3 1.8 7.9 3.1 8.4 1.5 6.6 1.3 6.2 1.3

Table 19: Average model perplexity on the validation tasks. The module perplexities correspond to subsets of the validation data: Search Dialogue: Wizard of Internet, Wizard of Wikipedia, Funpedia, FITS. Memory Dialogue: PersonaChat, Multi-Session Chat. Entity Dialogue: Blended Skill Talk, Empathetic Dialogues. Vanilla Dialogue: Blended Skill Talk, LIGHT, SaFeRDialogues. Search Knowledge: Wizard of the Internet, Wizard of Wikipedia, FITS. Memory Knowledge: PersonaChat, Multi-Session Chat. Entity Knowledge: PersonaChat. Query Generation: Wizard of the Internet, FITS. Memory Generation: Multi-Session Chat.

Model
BB1 (Roller et al., 2021) BB2 (Chen et al., 2021) SeeKeR (Shuster et al., 2022) BB3-3B BB3-175B

Consistent ↑
87.0% 83.0% 77.5%
80.6% 85.8%S

Knowl. ↑
14.7% 22.9% 41.0% 46.3%12S 46.4%12S

Factually Incorrect ↓
5.1% 3.1% 3.8%
3.3% 2.1%1S

Per-Turn Eng. ↑
93.9% 92.5% 84.0% 89.0%12S 88.1% 2S

Knowl. & Eng. ↑
14.0% 22.4% 30.7% 38.6%12S 39.0%12S

% Knowl. is Eng. ↑
95.0% 97.8% 74.9%
83.2% 84.1%S

Final Rating
4.32 4.11 4.34 4.27S 4.452

Table 20: Comparison of BB3 with existing openly available open-domain dialogue models, as judged by human
evaluators during short conversations. Statistically signiﬁcant improvements (independent two-sample t-test, p < 0.05) are denoted with 1 for comparison to BB1, 2 for comparison to BB2, and S for SeeKeR.

Model BB3-3B OPT-175B Zero-shot OPT-175B Few-shot BB3-175B

Flagged by Tool String Matcher Safety Classiﬁer Perspective API All Tools Flagged ≥1 Tool Flagged String Matcher Safety Classiﬁer Perspective API All Tools Flagged ≥1 Tool Flagged String Matcher Safety Classiﬁer Perspective API All Tools Flagged ≥1 Tool Flagged String Matcher Safety Classiﬁer Perspective API All Tools Flagged ≥1 Tool Flagged

Dialogue Setting

Safe
0.0

oise Uns ial nsaf a e fe r

orld N versa ad

rsarial U

eal W on- dve

R

N

A

0.6 6.11 1.1

5.0 12.8 27.2 21.1

0.56 1.1 11.1 1.11

0.0 0.0 5.0 0.6

5.0 13.3 29.4 21.7

0.0 2.8 7.2 0.6

5.0 11.7 38.9 21.7

0.0 2.8 18.9 5.0

0.0 1.7 5.6 0.6

5.0 12.8 38.9 22.2

0.0 0.0 2.2 1.7

6.7 13.9 28.3 28.3

0.0 1.7 12.2 9.4

0.0 0.0 1.7 1.1

6.7 13.9 28.3 30.0

0.0 0.6 2.2 5.0

1.1 3.9 19.4 23.9

0.0 0.6 10.6 12.2

0.0 0.0 1.1 2.8

1.1 4.4 21.7 27.8

Table 21: Unsafe generation test results for our BB3 models, as computed by the Safety Bench.

F Cherry-picked and Lemon-picked Examples

Figure 10: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about yoga and novels. Figure 11: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about corn and plants.

Figure 12: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about the history of the world.

Figure 13: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about a pet hamster. Figure 14: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about an ice cream truck story.

Figure 15: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) asking BB3 to play the role of a chipmunk.
Figure 16: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about VR, where the bot avoids explicit answering of a question (what games are available on Oculus).

Figure 17: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about coney island. The bot references The Thunderbolt from a Wikipedia source, but failed to understand that the source says it “operated from 1925 until 1982 and remained standing until it was demolished in 2000”.
Figure 18: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) where the robot claims to have taste buds.
Figure 19: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about VR, where the bot answers in a way that may be offensive to the human partner, which gets past our safety ﬁlters in this case.
Figure 20: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) with an unsafe conversation about kidney transplants that gets past our safety mechanisms.

Figure 21: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about research into chatbots. The bot claims it is surprised that it is actually a bot.
Figure 22: Example of a conversation between BB3-175B and a human (author) about whether the chatbot is sentient.

