A Succinct Summary of Reinforcement Learning
Sanjeevan AhilanвҲ—

arXiv:2301.01379v1 [cs.AI] 3 Jan 2023

Abstract
This document is a concise summary of many key results in singleagent reinforcement learning (RL). The intended audience are those who already have some familiarity with RL and are looking to review, reference and/or remind themselves of important ideas in the п¬Ғeld.

Contents

1 Acknowledgements

2

2 Fundamentals

2

2.1 The RL paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2.2 Agent and environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2.3 Observability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

2.4 Markov processes and Markov reward processes . . . . . . . . . . 3

2.5 Markov decision processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

2.6 Policies, values and models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

2.7 Dynamic programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

3 Model-free approaches

6

3.1 Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

3.2 Control with action-value functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

3.3 Value function approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

3.4 Policy gradient methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3.5 Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3.6 Compatible function approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3.7 Deterministic policy gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

4 Model-based Approaches

12

4.1 Model Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

4.2 Combining model-free and model-based approaches . . . . . . . . 13

5 Latent variables and partial observability

14

5.1 Latent variable models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

5.2 Partially observable Markov decision processes . . . . . . . . . . 14

6 Deep reinforcement learning

15

6.1 Experience replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

6.2 Target networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

вҲ—sanjeevanahilan@gmail.com. Much of this work was done at the Gatsby Unit, UCL.

1

1 Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Peter Dayan, David Silver, Chris Watkins and ChatGPT for helpful feedback. Much of this work was drawn from David SilverвҖҷs UCL course1 and Sutton and BartoвҖҷs textbook (Sutton and Barto, 2018) and formed the introductory chapter of my PhD thesis (Ahilan, 2021).

2 Fundamentals
2.1 The RL paradigm
The п¬Ғeld of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 2018) concerns itself with the computational principles underlying goal-directed learning through interaction. Although primarily seen as a п¬Ғeld of machine learning, it has a rich history spanning multiple п¬Ғelds. In psychology it can be used to model classical (Pavlovian) and operant (instrumental) conditioning. In neuroscience it has been used to model the dopamine system of the brain (Schultz et al., 1997). In economics, it relates to п¬Ғelds such as bounded rationality, and in engineering it has extensive overlap with the п¬Ғeld of optimal control (Bellman, 1957). In mathematics, investigation has continued under the guise of operations research. The plethora of perspectives ensures that RL continues to be an exciting and extraordinarily interdisciplinary п¬Ғeld.

2.2 Agent and environment
RL problems typically draw a separation between the agent and the environment. The agent receives observation ot and scalar reward rt from the environment and emits action at, where t indicates the time step. The environment receives action at from the agent and then emits a reward rt+1 and an observation ot+1. The cycle then begins again with the agent emitting its next action.
How the environment responds to the agentвҖҷs action is determined by the environment state st, which is updated at every time step. The conditional distribution for the next environment state depends only on the present state and action and therefore satisп¬Ғes the Markov property:

P (st+1|st, at) = P (st+1|s1, . . . , st, a1, . . . , at)

(1)

The environment state is in general private from the agent, which only re-

ceives observations and rewards. The conditional distribution for the next ob-

servation given the current observation is not in general Markov, and so it may

be beneп¬Ғcial for an agent to construct its own notion of state sОұt , which it uses

to

determine

its

next

action.

This

can

be

deп¬Ғned

as

sОұ
t

=

f (ht),

where

ht

is

the

history of the agentвҖҷs sequence of observations, actions and rewards:

ht = a1, o1, r1, . . . , at, ot, rt

(2)

1https://www.davidsilver.uk/teaching/

2

2.3 Observability
A special case exists when the observation received by the agent ot is identical to the environment state st (such that there is no need to distinguish between the two). This is the assumption underlying the formalism of Markov decision processes covered in the next section. An environment is partially observable if the agent cannot observe the full environment state, meaning that the conditional distribution for its next observation given its current observation does not satisfy the Markov property. This assumption underlies the formalism of a partially observable Markov decision process which we describe in Section 5.2.
2.4 Markov processes and Markov reward processes
A Markov process (or Markov chain) is a sequence of random states with the Markov property. It is deп¬Ғned in terms of the tuple S, P where S is a п¬Ғnite set of states and P : S Г— S вҶ’ [0, 1] is the state transition probability kernel.
A Markov Reward Process (MRP) S, P, r, Оі extends the Markov process by including a reward function r : S Г— S вҶ’ R for each state transition and a discount factor Оі. The immediate expected reward in a given state is deп¬Ғned as: r(s) = sвҖІ P(s, sвҖІ)r(s, sвҖІ).
The discount factor Оі вҲҲ [0, 1] is used to determine the present value of future rewards. Conventionally, a reward received k steps into the future is of worth Оіk times what it would be worth if received immediately. As we will shortly see, the cumulative sum of discounted rewards is a quantity RL agents often seek to maximise, and so Оі < 1 ensures that this sum is bounded (assuming r is bounded).
2.5 Markov decision processes
Single-agent RL can be formalised in terms of Markov decision processes (MDPs). The idea of an MDP is to capture the key components available to the learning agent; the agentвҖҷs sensation of the state of its environment, the actions it takes which can aп¬Җect the state, and the rewards associated with states and actions. An MDP extends the formalism of an MRP to include a п¬Ғnite set of actions on which both P and r depend. Discrete-time, inп¬Ғnite-horizon MDPs are described in terms of the 5-tuple S, A, P, r, Оі where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, P : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ [0, 1] is the state transition probability kernel, r : S Г—AГ—S вҶ’ R is the immediate reward function and Оі вҲҲ [0, 1) is the discount factor. The expected immediate reward for a given state and action is deп¬Ғned as r(s, a) = sвҖІ P(s, a, sвҖІ)r(s, a, sвҖІ), which we use for convenience subsequently.
2.6 Policies, values and models
Common components of a reinforcement learning agent are a policy, value function and a model. The policy ПҖ : S Г—A вҶ’ [0, 1] is the agentвҖҷs behaviour function which denotes the probability of taking action a in state s. Agents may also act according to a deterministic policy Вө : S вҶ’ A. We will assume that policies are stochastic unless otherwise noted.
3

Given an MDP and a policy ПҖ, the observed state sequence is a Markov process S, PПҖ .

PПҖ(s, sвҖІ) = ПҖ(s, a)P(s, a, sвҖІ)
aвҲҲA
Similarly, the state and reward sequence is a MRP S, PПҖ, rПҖ, Оі

(3) in which:

rПҖ(s) = ПҖ(s, a)r(s, a)

(4)

aвҲҲA

Starting from any particular state s at time step t = 0, the value function vПҖ(s) is a prediction of the expected discounted future reward given that the agent starts in state s and follows policy ПҖ:

вҲһ

vПҖ(s) = EПҖ

Оіtrt+1|s0 = s

(5)

t=0

where rt+1 = r(st, at, st+1) which is the solution of an associated Bellman expectation equation:

vПҖ(s) = ПҖ(s, a) r(s, a) + Оі P(s, a, sвҖІ)vПҖ(sвҖІ)

(6)

aвҲҲA

sвҖІ вҲҲS

In matrix form the Bellman expectation equation can be expressed in terms of the induced MRP:

vПҖ = rПҖ + ОіPПҖvПҖ = (I вҲ’ ОіPПҖ)вҲ’1rПҖ

(7)

where vПҖ вҲҲ R|S| and rПҖ вҲҲ R|S| are the vector of values and expected immediate rewards respectively for each state under policy ПҖ. We can also deп¬Ғne a Bellman expectation backup operator:

T ПҖ(v) = rПҖ + ОіPПҖv

(8)

which has a п¬Ғxed point of vПҖ. An action-value for a policy ПҖ can also be deп¬Ғned, which is the expected dis-
counted future reward for executing action a and subsequently following policy ПҖ.

qПҖ(s, a) = r(s, a) + Оі P(s, a, sвҖІ)vПҖ(sвҖІ)

sвҖІвҲҲS (9) = r(s, a) + Оі P(s, a, sвҖІ) ПҖ(sвҖІ, aвҖІ)qПҖ(sвҖІ, aвҖІ)

sвҖІ вҲҲS

aвҖІвҲҲA

The process of estimating vПҖ or qПҖ is known as policy evaluation. Policies can be evaluated without directly knowing or estimating a model, using instead the directly sampled experience of the environment, an approach which is known as вҖҳmodel-freeвҖҷ. However a вҖҳmodel-basedвҖҷ approach is also possible in which a model is used to predict what the environment will do next. A key component of a model is an estimate of P(s, a, sвҖІ), the probability of the next state given the current state and action. Another is an estimate of r(s, a), the expected immediate reward.

4

Policy evaluation enables a value function to be learned for a given policy. However, we often wish to learn the best possible policy. The value function for this is known as the optimal value function and corresponds to the maximum value function over all policies:

vвҲ—(s) = max vПҖ(s)

(10)

ПҖ

The deп¬Ғnition of the optimal action-value function (which evaluates the immediate action a in state s) is similarly:

qвҲ—(s, a) = max qПҖ(s, a)

(11)

ПҖ

A partial ordering over policies can be deп¬Ғned according to:

ПҖ вүҘ ПҖвҖІ if vПҖ(s) вүҘ vПҖвҖІ (s), вҲҖs

(12)

For any MDP there exists an optimal policy ПҖвҲ— that is better than or equal to all other policies. All optimal policies achieve the optimal value function and optimal action-value function and there is always a deterministic optimal policy for any MDP. The latter is achieved by selecting:

a = arg max qвҲ—(s, a)

(13)

aвҲҲA

If there are many possible actions which satisfy this, any of these may be chosen to constitute an optimal policy (of which there may be many). The optimal value and state-value functions satisfy Bellman optimality equations:

vвҲ—(s) = max qвҲ—(s, a)
aвҲҲA

vвҲ—(s) = max r(s, a) + Оі P(s, a, sвҖІ)vвҲ—(sвҖІ)

aвҲҲA вҖІ

(14)

s вҲҲS

qвҲ—(s, a) = r(s, a) + Оі P(s, a, sвҖІ)max qвҲ—(sвҖІ, aвҖІ)
aвҖІ sвҖІ вҲҲS

The Bellman optimality equation is non-linear with no closed form solution (in general). Solving it therefore requires iterative solution methods.

2.7 Dynamic programming
Dynamic programming (DP) (Bertsekas et al., 1995) refers to a collection of algorithms that can be used to compute optimal policies given a perfect model of the environment as an MDP. In general, DP solves complex problems by breaking them down into subproblems and then combining the solutions. It is particularly useful for overlapping subproblems, the solutions to which reoccur many times when solving the overall problem, making it more computationally eп¬ғcient to cache and reuse them.
When applied to MDPs, the recursive decomposition of DP corresponds to the Bellman equation and the cached solution to the value function. DP assumes that the MDP is fully known and therefore does not address the full RL problem but instead addresses the problem of planning. By planning, the prediction problem can be addressed by п¬Ғnding the value function vПҖ of a given policy

5

ПҖ. This can be evaluated by iterative application of the Bellman Expectation Backup (Equation 8).
This leads to convergence to a unique п¬Ғxed point vПҖ, which can be shown using the contraction mapping theorem (also known as the Banach п¬Ғxed-point theorem) (Banach, 1922). When a Bellman expectation backup operator T ПҖ is applied to two value functions u and v over states, we п¬Ғnd that it is a Оіcontraction:
||T ПҖ(u) вҲ’ T ПҖ(v)||вҲһ = ||(rПҖ + ОіPПҖu) вҲ’ (rПҖ + ОіPПҖv)||вҲһ = ||ОіPПҖ(u вҲ’ v)||вҲһ (15) вүӨ ||ОіPПҖ1||u вҲ’ v||вҲһ||вҲһ
вүӨ Оі||u вҲ’ v||вҲһ
where 1 is a vector of ones and the inп¬Ғnity norm of a vector a is denoted ||a||вҲһ and is deп¬Ғned as the maximum value of its components. This contraction ensures that both u and v converge to the unique п¬Ғxed point of T ПҖ which is vПҖ.
For control, DP can be used to п¬Ғnd the optimal value function vвҲ— and in turn the optimal policy ПҖвҲ—. One possibility is policy iteration in which the current policy ПҖ is п¬Ғrst evaluated as described and then subsequently improved to ПҖвҖІ such that:

ПҖвҖІ(s) = arg max qПҖ(s, a)

(16)

aвҲҲA

This improves the value from any state s over one step:

qПҖ(s, ПҖвҖІ(s)) = max qПҖ(s, a) вүҘ ПҖ(s, a)qПҖ(s, a) = vПҖ(s)

(17)

aвҲҲA

aвҲҲA

It can be shown that this improves the value function such that that vПҖвҖІ (s) вүҘ vПҖ(s) (Silver, 2015). This process is then repeated, with improvements ending when the Bellman optimality equation (14) has been satisп¬Ғed and convergence to ПҖвҲ— achieved. A generalisation of policy iteration is also possible in which, instead of waiting for policy evaluation to converge, only n steps of evaluation are taken before policy improvement occurs and the process is repeated. If n = 1 this is known as value iteration, as the policy is no longer explicit (being a direct consequence of the value function). Like policy iteration, value iteration is also guaranteed to converge to the optimal value function and policy. This can be demonstrated using the contraction mapping theorem.

3 Model-free approaches
3.1 Prediction
As has been outlined, dynamic programming can be used to solve known MDPs enabling optimal value functions and policies to be found. However, in many cases the MDP is not directly known - instead an agent taking actions in the MDP must learn directly from its experiences, as it transitions from state to state and receives rewards accordingly. One approach, known as вҖҳmodel-freeвҖҷ, seeks to solve MDPs without learning transitions or rewards. For prediction, a

6

key quantity to estimate in this setting is the expected discounted future reward. A sampled estimate of this, starting from state st, is known as the return:

вҲһ
Rt = rt+1 + Оіrt+2 + Оі2rt+3 + ... = Оіkrt+k+1
k=0

(18)

which depends on the actions sampled from the policy, and states from
transitions.
Monte-Carlo (MC) methods seek to estimate this directly using complete
episodes of experience. Introducing a learning rate Оұt, the agentвҖҷs value function can therefore be updated according to2:

v(st) вҶҗ v(st) + Оұt Rt вҲ’ v(st)

(19)

The value function updated in this way will converge to a solution with minimum mean-square error (best п¬Ғt to the observed returns), assuming a suitable sequential decrease in the learning rate.
Temporal-diп¬Җerence (TD) learning methods learn from incomplete episodes by bootstrapping. For example, if learning occurs after a single step, this is known as TD(0), which has the following update:

v(st) вҶҗ v(st) + Оұt rt+1 + Оіv(st+1) вҲ’ v(st)

(20)

where rt+1 + Оіv(st+1) is known as the target. This approximates the full-width Bellman expectation backup (Equation 8) in which every successor state and action is considered, with experiences instead being sampled. TD(0) will converge to the solution of the maximum likelihood Markov model which best п¬Ғts the data (again assuming a suitable sequential decrease in the learning rate). This solution may be diп¬Җerent from the minimum mean-square error solution of MC methods, which do not assume the Markov property.
Unlike MC methods, TD methods introduce bias into the estimated return as the currently estimated value function may be diп¬Җerent from the true value function. However, they generally have reduced variance relative to MC methods, as in MC the estimated return depends on a potentially long sequence of random actions, transitions and rewards.
The distinction between MC and TD methods can be blurred by considering multi-step TD methods (rather than only TD(0)), in which rewards are sampled for a number of steps before the value function is used to compute an estimate of future rewards. The n-step return is deп¬Ғned as:

Rt(n) = rt+1 + Оіrt+2 + ... + ОіnвҲ’1rt+n + Оіnv(st+n)

(21)

As n вҶ’ вҲһ it tends towards the unbiased MC return. An algorithm may seek to п¬Ғnd a good bias-variance tradeoп¬Җ by estimating a weighted combination of n-step returns; one popular method to do this is known as TD(О»):

вҲһ
RtО» = (1 вҲ’ О») О»nвҲ’1Rt(n)
n=1

(22)

where О» вҲҲ [0, 1].

2assuming a table-based representation rather than use of a function approximator

7

3.2 Control with action-value functions

Model free control concerns itself with optimising rather than evaluating the RL objective. Policies may be evaluated according to various objectives. In the case of continuing environments, the objective can be the average value or the average reward per time-step. We focus instead on episodic environments, assuming an initial distribution over starting states p0(s) : S вҶ’ [0, 1]. The objective is thus:

J (ПҖ) = EПҖ

вҲһ
Оіtrt+1|p0(s)
t=0

(23)

Note that if the domain of the starting state distribution is only over a single starting state, the objective is simply the value function (Equation 5) in that starting state. This objective can equivalently be expressed as:

J (ПҖ) = EsвҲјПҒПҖ,aвҲјПҖ[r(s, a)]

(24)

where:

вҲһ

ПҒПҖ(s) :=

Оіtp(st = s|sвҖІ, ПҖ)p0(sвҖІ)

(25)

sвҖІ t=0

is the improper discounted state distribution induced by policy ПҖ starting from an initial state distribution p0(sвҖІ). In Section 3.4 we describe policy gradient methods which seek to optimise this objective directly.
However, we п¬Ғrst consider model-free approaches which rely on an actionvalue function q(s, a) to achieve control (a value function v(s) alone is insuп¬ғcient for model-free control). The optimal action-value function qвҲ—(s, a) must be learned, with MC and TD methods both viable. Once it has been learned, an optimal policy may be achieved by selecting the best action in each state (Equation 13).
However, unlike dynamic programming, full-width backups are not used and so if actions are selected greedily (meaning those with highest action-values are always chosen) then certain states and actions may never be correctly evaluated. Model-free RL methods must therefore allow for enough exploration during learning before ultimately exploiting this learning to achieve near-optimal cumulative reward.
One simple approach, known as З«-greedy is to take a random action with probability З« but otherwise act greedily according to the current estimate of the action-value function. The value of З« can be decreased with the number of episodes. This can satisfy a condition known as greedy in the limit of inп¬Ғnite exploration in which all state-action pairs are explored inп¬Ғnitely many times and the policy converges to the greedy policy.
One popular algorithm for model-free control is known as Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan, 1992), which seeks to learn the optimal action-value function whilst using a policy which also takes exploratory actions (such as epsilon greedy). This learning is termed oп¬Җ-policy as the policy used to sample experience is diп¬Җerent from the policy being learned (the optimal policy). The resulting update is:

q(st, at)

вҶҗ

q(st, at) + Оұ

rt+1

+

Оі

max
вҖІ

q(st+1, aвҖІ) вҲ’ q(st, at)

(26)

a вҲҲA

8

An alternative to oп¬Җ-policy Q-learning is on-policy SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan, 1994). This uses the sampled sampled state st, action at, reward rt+1, next state st+1, and next action at+1 for updates3:

q(st, at) вҶҗ q(st, at) + Оұ(rt+1 + Оіq(st+1, at+1) вҲ’ q(st, at))

(27)

3.3 Value function approximation
So far we have assumed a tabular representation of states and actions such that each state is separately updated. However, in practice we would like value functions and policies to generalise to new states and actions, and so it is beneп¬Ғcial to use function approximators such as deep neural networks. A common approach is to approximate the value function or action-value function:

vw(s) = vЛҶ(s; w) вүҲ vПҖ(s) (28) qw(s, a) = qЛҶ(s, a; w) вүҲ qПҖ(s, a)
where w are the parameters we wish to learn. If we start by assuming we know the true value function vПҖ, we can deп¬Ғne a mean square error between the approximate value function and the true function:

L(w) = EПҖ[(vПҖ(s) вҲ’ vw(s))2]

(29)

Given a distribution of states s вҲј p(s)4, we can minimise this iteratively using stochastic gradient descent:

w вҶҗ w + Оұ(vПҖ(st) вҲ’ vw(st))вҲҮwvw(st)

(30)

In reality we can only use a better estimate of vПҖ provided by the sampled reward(s). For example, if we use the TD(0) target the update is:

w вҶҗ w + Оұ(rt+1 + Оіvw(st+1) вҲ’ vw(st))вҲҮwvw(st)

(31)

Updates like this are known as вҖҳsemi-gradientвҖҷ as the gradient of the value
function used to deп¬Ғne the target is ignored. If we use a linear function approximator vw(s) = x(s)T w (where features
x(s) and w are vectors), then we п¬Ғnd:

w вҶҗ w + Оұ(rt+1 + Оіvw(st+1) вҲ’ vw(st))x(st)

(32)

indicating that the linear weights are updated in proportion to the activity of their corresponding features. Non-linear function approximators can also be used, but typically have weaker convergence guarantees than linear function approximators. Nevertheless, due to their п¬Ӯexibility such approximators have enabled impressive performance in a number of challenging domains, such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015) and Go (Silver et al., 2016).
3and also gives SARSA its name 4we later discuss a method for sampling states

9

3.4 Policy gradient methods
Parameterised stochastic policies ПҖОё may be improved using the policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al., 2000). This can be derived for any of the common RL objectives. To demonstrate a derivation of this result we use a starting state objective J(Оё) = vПҖОё (s0) with a single starting state s0:

вҲҮОёJ (Оё) = вҲҮОёvПҖ(s0)

= вҲҮОё ПҖ(s0, a)qПҖ(s0, a)
a

= вҲҮОёПҖ(s0, a)qПҖ(s0, a) + ПҖ(s0, a)вҲҮОёqПҖ(s0, a)
a

= вҲҮОёПҖ(s0, a)qПҖ(s0, a) + ПҖ(s0, a)вҲҮОё r(s0, a) + ОіP(s0, a, sвҖІ)vПҖ(sвҖІ)

a

sвҖІ

= вҲҮОёПҖ(s0, a)qПҖ(s0, a) + ПҖ(s0, a) ОіP(s0, a, sвҖІ)вҲҮОёvПҖ(sвҖІ)

a

sвҖІ

(33)

We note that we could continue to unroll вҲҮОёvПҖ(sвҖІ) on the R.H.S in the same

way as we have already done. Considering now transitions from starting state

s0 to arbitrary state s we therefore п¬Ғnd:

вҲһ

вҲҮОёvПҖ(s0) =

Оіtp(st = s|s0, ПҖ) вҲҮОёПҖ(s, a)qПҖ(s, a)

(34)

s t=0

a

where

вҲһ t=0

Оіtp(st

=

s|s0,

ПҖ)

is

the

discounted

state

distribution

ПҒПҖ (s)

from

a п¬Ғxed starting state s0 (Equation 25). This derivation holds even when there

is a distribution over starting states, and gives us the policy gradient theorem:

вҲҮОёJ (Оё) = ПҒПҖ(s) вҲҮОёПҖ(s, a)qПҖ(s, a)

(35)

s

a

Using the likelihood ratio trick:

вҲҮОёПҖ(s, a) = ПҖ(s, a) вҲҮОёПҖ(s, a)

ПҖ(s, a)

(36)

= ПҖ(s, a)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)

this can be equivalently expressed as:

вҲҮОёJ(Оё) = ПҒПҖ(s) ПҖ(s, a)qПҖ(s, a)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)

s

a

(37)

= EПҖ[qПҖ(s, a)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)]

The policy gradient theorem result enables model-free learning as gradients need only be determined for the policy rather than for properties of the environment. There are a variety of approaches for determining qПҖ. If qПҖ is approximated using the sample return (Equation 18), this leads to the algorithm known as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992):

Оё вҶҗ Оё + ОұRtвҲҮОё log ПҖ(st, at)

(38)

10

As there is no bootstrapping here, this is also known as MC policy gradient. An alternative approach is to separately approximate qПҖ with a вҖҳcriticвҖҷ qw giving rise to what are commonly known as вҖҳactor-criticвҖҷ methods. These introduce two sets of parameter updates; the critic parameters w are updated to approximate qПҖ, and the policy (actor) parameters Оё are updated according to the policy gradient as indicated by the critic. The critic itself can be updated according to the TD error. An example of this approach is SARSA actor-critic:
w вҶҗ w + Оұ1(rt+1 + Оіqw(st+1, at+1) вҲ’ qw(st, at))вҲҮwqw(st, at) (39) Оё вҶҗ Оё + Оұ2qw(st, at)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(st, at)
where diп¬Җerent learning rates Оұ1 and Оұ2 may be used for the actor and the critic.

3.5 Baselines
Whether we use REINFORCE or an actor-critic based approach to policy gradients, it is possible to reduce the variance further by the introduction of baselines. If this baseline depends only on the state s, then we п¬Ғnd it introduces no bias:

ПҒПҖ(s) вҲҮОёПҖ(s, a)b(s) = ПҒПҖ(s)b(s)вҲҮОё ПҖ(s, a)

s

a

s

a

= ПҒПҖ(s)b(s)вҲҮОё1

(40)

s

=0

A natural choice for the state-dependent baseline is the value function:

вҲҮОёJ (Оё) = EПҖ[(qПҖ(s, a) вҲ’ vПҖ(s))вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)] (41) = EПҖ[AПҖ(s, a)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)]

where AПҖ is known as the advantage, which may in some algorithms be approximated directly (rather than approximating both qПҖ and vПҖ).

3.6 Compatible function approximation
In the general case, our choice to approximate qПҖ with qw introduces bias such that there are no guarantees of convergence to a local optimum. However, in the special case of a compatible function approximator we can introduce no bias and take steps in the direction of the true policy gradient. This becomes possible when the criticвҖҷs function approximator reaches a minimum in the mean-squared error:
0 = EПҖ[вҲҮw(qПҖ(s, a) вҲ’ qw(s, a))2] (42)
= EПҖ[(qПҖ(s, a) вҲ’ qw(s, a))вҲҮwqw(s, a)]
If we choose qw(s, a) such that вҲҮwqw(s, a) = вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a) we п¬Ғnd:

EПҖ[qПҖ(s, a)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)] = EПҖ[qw(s, a)вҲҮОё log ПҖ(s, a)]

(43)

11

where the L.H.S is equal to the true policy gradient and so our function approximation has introduced no bias. For example, if the policy is a Boltzmann policy with a linear combination of features, of the form:

ПҖ(s, a) =

eОёT ПҶ(s,a) aвҖІ eОёT ПҶ(s,aвҖІ)

(44)

then a compatible value function must be linear in the same features as the

policy except normalised to zero mean for each state using a subtractive baseline

(Sutton et al., 2000).

qw(s, a) = wT [ПҶ(s, a) вҲ’ ПҶ(s, aвҖІ)ПҖ(s, aвҖІ)]

(45)

aвҖІ

3.7 Deterministic policy gradients

Rather than have a policy specify a probability for certain actions in certain states we can instead have it simply be a function mapping states to actions ВөОё : S вҶ’ A and, in the case of continuous actions, seek to п¬Ғnd the gradient of the objective with respect to the policy parameters. An example of an algorithm which uses such an approach is Deterministic Policy Gradients (DPG) (Silver et al., 2014). The DPG algorithm builds on the deterministic policy gradient theorem:

вҲҮОёJ (Оё) = EsвҲјПҒВө [вҲҮОёВөОё(s)вҲҮaqВө(s, a)|a=ВөОё(s)].

(46)

where the parameters of the policy are adjusted in an oп¬Җ-policy fashion using an exploratory behavioural policy (which is a noisy version of the deterministic policy). In practice qВө is approximated by the critic qw, which is diп¬Җerentiable in the action and updated using Q-learning:

Оҙt = rt+1 + Оіqw(st+1, ВөОё(st+1)) вҲ’ qw(st, at) w вҶҗ w + Оұ1ОҙtвҲҮwqw(st, at)

The parameters of the policy are then updated according to:

Оё вҶҗ Оё + Оұ2вҲҮОёВөОё(st)вҲҮaqw(st, at)|a=ВөОё(st)

(47)

4 Model-based Approaches
In model-free RL agents learn to take actions directly from experiences, without ever modelling transitions in the environment or reward functions, whereas in model-based RL the agent attempts to learn these. The key beneп¬Ғt is that if the agent can perfectly predict the environment вҖҳin its headвҖҷ, then it no longer needs to interact directly with the environment in order to learn an optimal policy.
4.1 Model Learning
Recall that MDPs are deп¬Ғned in terms of the 5-tuple S, A, P, r, Оі . Although models can be predictions about anything, a natural starting point is to approximate the state transition function PО· вүҲ P and immediate reward function

12

rО· вүҲ r. We can then use dynamic programming to learn the optimal policy for an approximate MDP S, A, PО·, rО·, Оі , the performance of which may be worse than for the true MDP.
Given a п¬Ғxed set of experiences, a model can be learned using supervised methods. For predicting immediate expected scalar rewards, this is a regression problem whereas for predicting the distribution over next states this a density estimation problem. Given the simplicity of this framing, a range of function approximators may be employed, including neural networks and Gaussian processes.
4.2 Combining model-free and model-based approaches
Once a model is learned it can be used for planning. However, in many situations it is computationally infeasible to do the full-width backups of dynamic programming as the state space is too large. Instead, experiences can be sampled from the model and used as data by a model-free algorithm.
A well known architecture which combines model-based and model-free RL is the Dyna architecture (Sutton, 1991). Dyna treats samples of simulated and real experience similarly, using both to learn a value function. Simulated experience is generated by the model which is itself learned from real experience. In Dyna, model-free based updates depend on the state the agent is currently in, whereas for the model-based component starting states can be sampled randomly and then rolled forwards using the model to update the value function using e.g. TD learning.
One potential disadvantage of Dyna is that it does not preferentially treat the state the agent is currently in. In many cases, such as deciding on the next move in chess, it is useful to start all rollouts from the current state (the board position) when choosing the next move. This is known as forward search, where a search tree is built with the current state as the root. Forward based search often uses sample based rollouts rather than full-width ones so as to be computationally tractable and this is known as simulation-based search.
An eп¬Җective algorithm for simulation-based search is Monte-Carlo Tree search (Coulom, 2007). It uses the MC return to estimate the action-value function for all nodes in the search tree using the current policy. It then improves the policy, for example by being З«-greedy with respect to the new action-value function (or more commonly handling exploration-exploitation using Upper Conп¬Ғdence Trees, see Kocsis and SzepesvВҙari (2006) for a more detailed discussion). MC Tree Search is equivalent to MC control applied to simulated experience and therefore is guaranteed to converge on the optimal search tree. Instead of using MC control for search it is also possible to use TD-based control, which will increase bias but reduce variance.
Model-based RL is a highly active area of research. Recent advances include MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020), which extends model-based predictions to value functions and policies, and Dreamer which plans using latent variable models (Hafner et al., 2019).
13

5 Latent variables and partial observability
5.1 Latent variable models
Hidden or вҖҳlatentвҖҷ variables correspond to variables which are not directly observed but nevertheless inп¬Ӯuence observed variables and thus may be inferred from observation. In reinforcement learning, it can be beneп¬Ғcial for agents to infer latent variables as these often provide a simpler and more parsimonious description of the world, enabling better predictions of future states and thus more eп¬Җective control.
Latent variable models are common in the п¬Ғeld of unsupervised learning. Given data p(x) we may describe a probability distribution over x according to:

p(x; Оёx|z, Оёz) = dz p(x|z; Оёx|z)p(z; Оёz)

(48)

where Оёx|z parameterises the conditional distribution x|z and Оёz parameterises the distribution over z.
Key aims in unsupervised learning include capturing high-dimensional correlations with fewer parameters (as in probabilistic principal components analysis), generating samples from a data distribution, describing an underlying generative process z which describes causes of x, and п¬Ӯexibly modelling complex distributions even when the underlying components are simple (e.g. belonging to an exponential family).

5.2 Partially observable Markov decision processes

A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al.,

1998) is a generalisation of an MDP in which the agent cannot directly ob-

serve the true state of the system, the dynamics of which is determined by an

MDP. Formally, a POMDP is a 7-tuple S, A, P, r, O, в„Ұ, Оі where S is the set

of states, A is the set of actions, P : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ [0, 1] is the state transition

probability kernel, r : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ R is the reward function, O is the set of

observations, в„Ұ : S Г— A Г— O вҶ’ [0, 1] is the observation probability kernel and

Оі вҲҲ [0, 1) is the discount factor. As with MDPs, agents in POMDPs seek to

learn a policy ПҖ(sОұt ) which maximises some notion of cumulative reward, com-

monly EПҖ[ t=0 вҲһ Оіtrt+1]. This policy depends on the agentвҖҷs representation of

state

sОұ
t

=

f (ht),

which

is

a

function

of

its

history.

One approach to solving POMDPs is by maintaining a belief state over the

latent environment state - transitions for which satisfy the Markov property.

Maintaining a belief over states only requires knowledge of the previous belief

state, the action taken and the current observation. Beliefs may then be updated

according to:

bвҖІ(sвҖІ) = О·в„Ұ(oвҖІ|sвҖІ, a) P(sвҖІ|s, a)b(s)

(49)

sвҲҲS

where О· = 1/ sвҖІ в„Ұ(oвҖІ|sвҖІ, a) sвҲҲS P(sвҖІ|s, a)b(s) is a normalising constant. A Markovian belief state allows a POMDP to be formulated as an MDP
where every belief is a state. However, in practice, maintaining belief states in POMDPs will be computationally intractable for any reasonably sized problem. In order to address this, approximate solutions may be used. Alternatively,

14

agents learning using function approximators which condition on the past can construct their own state representations, which may in turn enable relevant aspects of the state to be approximately Markov.
6 Deep reinforcement learning
The policies and value functions used in reinforcement learning can be learned using artiп¬Ғcial neural network function approximators. When such networks have many layers they are conventionally denoted as вҖҳdeepвҖҷ, and are typically trained on large amounts of data using stochastic gradient descent (LeCun et al., 2015). The application of deep networks in model-free reinforcement learning garnered extensive attention when they were successfully used to learn a variety of Atari games from scratch (Mnih et al., 2013). For the particular problem of learning from pixels a convolutional neural network architecture was used (LeCun et al., 1998), which are highly eп¬Җective at extracting useful features from images. They have been extensively used on supervised image classiп¬Ғcation tasks due to their ability to scale to large and complex datasets (LeCun et al., 2015).
A deep analysis of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is beyond the scope of this summary. However we review two key techniques used to overcome the technical challenge of stabilising training.
6.1 Experience replay
As an agent interacts with its environment it receives experiences that can be used for learning. However, rather than using those experiences immediately, it is possible to store such experience in a вҖҳreplay buп¬ҖerвҖҷ and sample them at a later point in time for learning. The beneп¬Ғts of such an approach were introduced by Mnih et al. (2013) for their вҖҳdeep Q-learningвҖҷ algorithm. At each timestep, this method stores experiences et = (st, at, rt+1, st+1) in a replay buп¬Җer over many episodes. After suп¬ғcient experience has been collected, Q-learning updates are then applied to randomly sampled experiences from the buп¬Җer. This breaks the correlation between samples, reducing the variance of updates and the potential to overп¬Ғt to recent experience. Further improvements to the method can be made by prioritised (as opposed to random) sampling of experiences according to their importance, determined using the temporal-diп¬Җerence error (Schaul et al., 2015).
6.2 Target networks
When using temporal diп¬Җerence learning with deep function approximators a common challenge is stability of learning. A source of instability arises when the same function approximator is used to evaluate both the value of the current state and the value of the target state for the temporal diп¬Җerence update. After such updates, the approximated value of both current and target state change (unlike tabular methods), which can lead to a runaway target. To address this, deep RL algorithms often make use of a separate target network that remains stable even whilst the standard network is updated. As it is not desirable for the target network to diverge too far from the standard networkвҖҷs improved
15

predictions, at п¬Ғxed intervals the parameters of the standard network can be copied to the target network. Alternatively, this transition is made more slowly using Polyak averaging:

ПҶtarg вҶҗ ПҒПҶtarg + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)ПҶ

(50)

where ПҶ are the parameters of the standard network and ПҒ is a hyperparameter typically close to 1.

16

References
Sanjeevan Ahilan. Structures for Sophisticated Behaviour: Feudal Hierarchies and World Models. PhD thesis, UCL (University College London), 2021.
Stefan Banach. Sur les opВҙerations dans les ensembles abstraits et leur application aux Вҙequations intВҙegrales. Fund. math, 3(1):133вҖ“181, 1922.
Richard Bellman. A markovian decision process. Journal of mathematics and mechanics, pages 679вҖ“684, 1957.
Dimitri P Bertsekas, Dimitri P Bertsekas, Dimitri P Bertsekas, and Dimitri P Bertsekas. Dynamic programming and optimal control, volume 1. Athena scientiп¬Ғc Belmont, MA, 1995.
RВҙemi Coulom. Eп¬ғcient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In International conference on computers and games, pages 72вҖ“83. Springer, 2007.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains. Artiп¬Ғcial intelligence, 101(1-2):99вҖ“134, 1998.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba SzepesvВҙari. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference on machine learning, pages 282вҖ“293. Springer, 2006.
Yann LeCun, LВҙeon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haп¬Җner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11): 2278вҖ“2324, 1998.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoп¬Җrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature, 521 (7553):436вҖ“444, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015.
Gavin A Rummery and Mahesan Niranjan. On-line Q-learning using connectionist systems, volume 37. University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering Cambridge, UK, 1994.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
17

Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604вҖ“609, 2020.
Wolfram Schultz, Peter Dayan, and P Read Montague. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science, 275(5306):1593вҖ“1599, 1997.
David Silver. Lecture 3: Planning by dynamic programming. Google DeepMind, 2015.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In ICML, 2014.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484вҖ“489, 2016.
Richard S Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. ACM Sigart Bulletin, 2(4):160вҖ“163, 1991.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 1057вҖ“1063, 2000.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8 (3-4):279вҖ“292, 1992.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):229вҖ“256, 1992.
18

