ItemRank: A Random-Walk Based Scoring Algorithm for Recommender Engines
Marco Gori, Augusto Pucci Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
University of Siena Via Roma, 56. Siena, Italy {marco,augusto}@dii.unisi.it

Abstract
Recommender systems are an emerging technology that helps consumers to ﬁnd interesting products. A recommender system makes personalized product suggestions by extracting knowledge from the previous users interactions. In this paper, we present ”ItemRank”, a random–walk based scoring algorithm, which can be used to rank products according to expected user preferences, in order to recommend top–rank items to potentially interested users. We tested our algorithm on a standard database, the MovieLens data set, which contains data collected from a popular recommender system on movies, that has been widely exploited as a benchmark for evaluating recently proposed approaches to recommender system (e.g. [Fouss et al., 2005; Sarwar et al., 2002]). We compared ItemRank with other state-of-the-art ranking techniques (in particular the algorithms described in [Fouss et al., 2005]). Our experiments show that ItemRank performs better than the other algorithms we compared to and, at the same time, it is less complex than other proposed algorithms with respect to memory usage and computational cost too.
1 Introduction
A recommender system makes personalized product suggestions by extracting knowledge from the previous user interactions with the system. Such services are particularly useful in the modern electronic marketplace which offers an unprecedented range of products. In fact a recommender system represents an added value both for consumers, who can easily ﬁnd products they really like, and for sellers, who can focus their offers and advertising efforts. Several recommender systems have been developed that cope with different products, e.g. MovieLens for movies (see [Sarwar et al., 2001]), GroupLens for usenet news [Miller et al., 2002], Ringo for music [Shardanand and Maes, 1995], Jester for jokes [Goldberg et al., 2001] and many other (see e.g. [Schafer et al., 2001] for a review). A recommender system constructs a user proﬁle on the basis of explicit or implicit interactions of the user with the system. The proﬁle is used to ﬁnd products to recommend to the user. In the simplest approach, the

proﬁle is constructed using only features that are related to the user under evaluation and to the products he/she has already considered. In those cases, the proﬁle consists of a parametric model that is adapted according to the customer’s behavior. Key issues of collaborative ﬁltering approach are scalability and quality of the results. In fact, real life large– scale E–commerce applications must efﬁciently cope with hundreds of thousands of users. Moreover, the accuracy of the recommendation is crucial in order to offer a service that is appreciated and used by customers. In this paper, we present ”ItemRank”, a random–walk based scoring algorithm, which can be used to rank products according to expected user preferences, in order to recommend top–rank items to potentially interested users. We tested our algorithm on a popular database, the MovieLens dataset1 by the GroupLens Research group at University of Minnesota and we compared ItemRank with other state-of-the-art ranking techniques (in particular the algorithms described in [Fouss et al., 2005]). This database contains data collected from a popular recommender system on movies that has been widely exploited as a benchmark for evaluating recently proposed approaches to recommender system (e.g. [Fouss et al., 2005; Sarwar et al., 2002]). The schema of such archive resembles the structure of the data of many other collaborative ﬁltering applications. Our experiments show that ItemRank performs better than the other algorithms we compared to and, at the same time, it is less complex than other proposed algorithms with respect to memory usage and computational cost too. The paper is organized as follows. In the next subsection (1.1) we review the related literature with a special focus on other graph based similarity measure and scoring algorithms applied to recommender systems. Section 2 describes the MovieLens data set (in subsection 2.1) and illustrates the data model we adopted (in subsection 2.2). Section 3 discusses ItemRank algorithm in details and we address ItemRank algorithm complexity issues in subsection 3.1. Section 4 contains the details of the experimentation, while Section 5 draws some conclusions and addresses future aspects of this research.
1http://www.movielens.umn.edu

IJCAI-07 2766

1.1 Related Work
Many different recommending algorithms have been proposed in literature, for example there are techniques based on Bayesian networks [Breese et al., 1998], Support Vector Machines [Grcar et al., 2005] and factor analysis [Canny, 2002]. The most successful and well–known approach to recommender system design is based on collaborative ﬁltering [Sarwar et al., 2001; Shardanand and Maes, 1995]. In collaborative ﬁltering, each user collaborates with others to establish the quality of products by providing his/her opinion on a set of products. Also, a similarity measure between users is deﬁned by comparing the proﬁles of different users. In order to suggest a product to an ”active user”, the recommender system selects the items among those scored by similar customers. The similarity measure is often computed using the Pearson–r correlation coefﬁcient between users (e.g. in [Sarwar et al., 2001]). Recently a graph based approach has been proposed in [Fouss et al., 2005]. Fouss et al. compared different scoring algorithm to compute a preference ranking of products (in that case movies) to suggest to a group of users. In this paper the problem has been modeled as a bipartite graph, where nodes are users (people node) and movies (movie node), and there is a link connecting a people node ui to a movie node mj if and only if ui watched movie mj, in this case arcs are undirected and can be weighted according to user preferences expressed about watched movies. Authors tested many different algorithms using a wide range of similarity measures in order to rank movies according to user preferences, some of the most interesting methods are:
Average Commute Time (CT). This is a distance measure between a pair of nodes i and j in a graph, we denote it as n(i, j), it is deﬁned as the average number of steps that a random walker2 going across a given graph, starting in the state corresponding to node i, will take to enter state j for the ﬁrst time and go back to i. If we measure this distance between people and movie nodes in the given bipartite graph, we can use this score to perform the movie ranking.
Principal Component Analysis based on Euclidean Commute Time Distance (PCA CT). From the eigenvector decomposition of L+, that is the pseudoinverse of the Laplacian matrix (L) corresponding to the graph, it is possible to map nodes into a new Euclidean space that preserves the Euclidean Commute Time Distance, it is also possible to project to a m-dimensional subspace by performing a PCA and keeping a given number of principal components. Then distances computed between nodes in the reduced space can be used to rank the movies for each person.
Pseudoinverse of the Laplacian Matrix (L+). Matrix L+ is the matrix containing the inner products of the node vectors in the Euclidean space where the nodes are exactly separated by the ECTD, so li,j + can be used as the similarity measure between node i and j, in order to rank movies according to their similarity with the person.
In literature there are many other examples of algorithms using graphical structures in order to discover relationships between items. Chebotarev and Shamis proposed in [Chebotarev and Shamis, 1997] and [Chebotarev and Shamis, 1998]
2see [Norris, 1997] for more details

a similarity measure between nodes of a graph integrating indirect paths, based on the matrix-forest theorem. Similarity measures based on random-walk models have been considered in [White and Smyth, 2003], where average ﬁrst-passage time has been used as a similarity measure between nodes. In collaborative recommendation ﬁeld is also interesting to consider different metrics described in [Brand, 2005].
2 The Problem
Formally, a recommender system deals with a set of users ui, i = 1, . . . , Un and a set of products pj, j = 1, . . . , Pn, and its goal consists of computing, for each pair: ui, pj, a score rˆi,j that measures the expected interest of users ui for product pj on the basis of a knowledge base containing a set of preferences expressed by some users about products. So we need a scoring algorithm to rank products/items for every given user according to its expected preferences, then a recommender system will suggest to a user top-ranked items with respect to personalized ordering. In this section we present the data model we adopted and MovieLens data set, that is a widely used benchmark to evaluate scoring algorithms applied to recommender systems. Our choice with respect to the data model and the data set is not restrictive since it reﬂect a very common scenario while dealing with recommender systems. In the following we will indifferently make use of terms such as item, product and movie depending on the context, but obviously the proposed algorithm is a general purpose scoring algorithm and it does not matter which kind of items we are ranking in a particular scenario, moreover we will also use the notation mj to refer a product pj in the particular case of movies to be ranked.
2.1 MovieLens Data Set
MovieLens site has over 50, 000 users who have expressed opinions on more than 3, 000 different movies. The MovieLens dataset is a standard dataset constructed from the homonym site archive, by considering only users who rated 20 or more movies, in order to achieve a greater reliability for user proﬁling. The dataset contains over 100, 000 ratings from 943 users for 1, 682 movies. Every opinion is represented using a tuple: ti,j = (ui, mj, ri,j), where ti,j is the considered tuple, ui ∈ U is an user, mj ∈ M is a movie, and ri,j is a integer score between 1 (bad movie) and 5 (good movie). The database provides a set of features characterizing users and movies which include: the category of the movie, the age, gender, and occupation of the user, and so on. The dataset comes with ﬁve predeﬁned splitting, each uses 80% of the ratings for the training set and 20% for the test set (as described in [Sarwar et al., 2002]). For every standard splitting we call L and T respectively the set of tuples used for training and for testing, moreover we refer the set of movies in the training set rated by user ui as Lui and we write Tui for movies in the test set. More formally: Lui = {tk,j ∈ L : k = i} and Tui = {tk,j ∈ T : k = i}.
2.2 Data Model: Correlation Graph
Even from a superﬁcial analysis of the proposed problem, it seems to be clear that there is a different correlation degree

IJCAI-07 2767

between movies, if we could exploit this information from
the training set then it would be quite easy to compute user dependent preferences. We deﬁne Ui,j ⊆ U the set of users who watched (according to the training set) both movie mi and mj, so:

Ui,j =

{uk : (tk,i ∈ Luk ) ∧ (tk,j ∈ Luk )} if i = j

∅

if i = j

Now we compute the (|M |×|M |) matrix containing the number of users who watched each pair of movies:
C˜i,j = |Ui,j |
where |·| denotes the cardinality of a set, obviously ∀i, C˜i,i = 0 and C˜ is a symmetric matrix. We normalize matrix C˜ in order to obtain a stochastic matrix Ci,j = ωj C˜i,j where ωj is the sum of entries in j − th column of C˜. C is the Correlation Matrix, every entry contains the correlation index between movie pairs. The Correlation Matrix can be also considered as a weighted connectivity matrix for the Correlation Graph GC. Nodes in graph GC correspond to movies in M and there will be an edge (mi, mj) if and only if Ci,j > 0. Moreover the weight associated to link (mi, mj) will be Ci,j, note that while C˜ is symmetrical, C is not, so the weight associated to (mi, mj) can differ from (mj, mi) weight. The Correlation Graph is a valuable graphical model useful to exploit correlation between movies, weights associated to links provide an approximate measure of movie/movie relative correlation, according to information extracted from ratings expressed by users in the training set.

3 ItemRank Algorithm
The idea underlying the ItemRank algorithm is that we can use the model expressed by the Correlation Graph to forecast user preferences. For every user in the training set we know the ratings he assigned to a certain number of movies, that is Lui , so, thanks to the graph GC we can ”spread” user preferences through the Correlation Graph. Obviously we have to properly control the preference ﬂow in order to transfer high score values to movies that are strongly related to movies with good ratings. The spreading algorithm we apply has to possess two key properties: propagation and attenuation. These properties reﬂect two key assumptions. First of all if a movie mk is related to one or more good movies, with respect to a given user ui, then movie mk will also be a good suggestion for user ui , if we analyse the Correlation Graph we can easily discover relationships between movies and also the strength of these connections, that is the weight associated to every link connecting two movies. The second important factor we have to take into account is attenuation. Good movies have to transfer their positive inﬂuence through the Correlation Graph, but this effect decrease its power if we move further and further away from good movies, moreover if a good movie mi is connected to two or more nodes, these have to share the boosting effect from mi according to the weights of their connections as computed in matrix C. PageRank algorithm (see [Page et al., 1998]) has both propagation and

attenuation properties we need, furthermore thanks to signif-
icant research efforts we can compute PageRank in a very efﬁcient way (see [Kamvar et al., 2003a]). Consider a generic graph G = (V, E), where V is the set of nodes connected by directed links in E, the classic PageRank algorithm computes an importance score P R(n) for every node n ∈ V according to graph connectivity: a node will be important if it is
connected to important nodes with a low out-degree. So the PageRank score for node n is deﬁned as:

P R(n) = α ·

P R(q) + (1 − α) · 1 (1)

q:(q,n)∈E ωq |V |

where ωq is the out-degree of node q, α is a decay factor3. The equivalent matrix form of equation 1 is:

PR = α · C · PR + (1 − α) · 1 · 1|V| (2) |V |
where C is the normalized connectivity matrix for graph G and 1|V| is a |V| long vector of ones. PageRank can also be computed iterating equation 2, for example by applying the Jacobi method [Golub and Loan, 1996], even if iteration should be run until PageRank values convergence, we can also use a ﬁxed number I of iterations. Classic PageRank can be extended by generalizing equation 2:

PR = α · M · PR + (1 − α) · d

(3)

where M is a stochastic matrix, its non-negative entries
has to sum up to 1 for every column, and vector d has non-
negative entries summing up to 1. Vector d can be tuned in
order to bias the PageRank by boosting nodes corresponding
to high value entries and matrix M controls the propagation
and attenuation mode. Biased PageRank has been analysed in [Langville and Meyer, 2003] and custom static score distri-
bution vectors d have been applied to compute topic-sensitive PageRank [Haveliwala, 2002], reputation of a node in a peerto-peer network [Kamvar et al., 2003b] and for combating web spam [Gyongyi et al., 2004]. We present the ItemRank
algorithm, that is a biased version of PageRank designed to be
applied to a recommender system. ItemRank equation can be easily derived from equation 3. We use graph GC to compute a ItemRank value IRui for every movie node and for every user proﬁle. In this case the stochastic matrix M will be the Correlation Matrix C and for every user ui we compute a different IRui by simply choosing a different dui static score distribution vector. The resulting equation is:

IRui = α · C · IRui + (1 − α) · dui

(4)

where dui has been built according to user ui preferences as recorded in training set Lui . The unnormalized d˜ui, with respect to the j − th component, is deﬁned as:

d˜j =
ui

0 if ti,j ∈ Lui ri,j if ti,j ∈ Lui ∧ ti,j = (ui, mj , ri,j )

3A common choice for α is 0.85

IJCAI-07 2768

˜
dui So the normalized dui vector will simply be dui = ˜ .
|dui | ItemRank, as deﬁned in equation 4, can be computed also iteratively in this way:
IRui (0) = |M1 | · 1|M| (5) IRui (t + 1) = α · C · IRui (t) + (1 − α) · dui
This dynamic system has to be run for every user, luckily it only needs on average about 20 iterations to converge. The interpretation of IRui score vector for user ui is straightforward, ItemRank scores induce a sorting of movies according to their expected liking for a given user. The higher is the ItemRank for a movie, the higher is the probability that a given user will prefer it to a lower score movie.
3.1 Complexity Issues
ItemRank algorithm results to be very efﬁcient both from computational and memory resource usage point of view. We need to store a |M | nodes graph with a limited number of edges. The interesting fact is that graph GC contains edges (mi, mj) and (mj, mi) if and only if ∃uk : tk,i ∈ Luk ∧ tk,j ∈ Luk , so no matter the number of users satisfying the previous condition, ratings information will be compressed in just a couple of links anyway. It is interesting to note that the data structure we use scale very well with the increase of the number of users, in fact GC node set cardinality is independent from |U| and also the number of edges tend to increase very slowly after |U| has exceeded a certain threshold U¯ . That is a very useful property, because in a real applicative scenario the number of users for a certain e-commerce service and the number of expressed preferences about products will rise much faster than the total amount of offered products. Moreover ItemRank computation is very efﬁcient, thanks to its strong relationship with PageRank algorithm, and we only need about 20 iterations of system 5 for every user in order to rank every movie according to every user taste, so if we have |U| users we have to run the algorithm |U| different times. ItemRank is more efﬁcient than similar Random-Walk based approach such as CT and L+ (already introduced in subsection 1.1, see [Fouss et al., 2005] for details), in fact both CT and L+ require to handle a graph containing nodes representing users and products and edges referred to user preferences. So in this graph there are |U| + |M| nodes and two edges (ui, mj),(mj, ui) for every opinion (ui, mj, ri,j), while in the case of ItemRank you have only |M| nodes and ratings information is compressed. CT is used to rank every movie with respect to every system user, so the average commute time (CT) n(ui, mj) referred to any user-movie couple ui, mj has to be computed, but n(ui, mj) = m(ui|mj) + m(mj|ui) where m(ui|mj) denotes the average ﬁrst-passage time from node ui to node mj. So CT needs 2 · |U| · |M| average ﬁrst-passage time computations, while ItemRank has to be applied only |U| times to rank every movie with respect to its similarity to every user. The situation is similar also if we consider L+ algorithm, in this case, as stated in [Fouss et al., 2005], the direct computation of the pseudoinverse of the Laplacian matrix L becomes intractable if the number of nodes becomes large (that could

easy happen while the number of users increase), some op-
timized methods to partially overcome these limitations has been proposed in [Brand, 2005].

4 Experimental Results
To evaluate the performances of the ItemRank algorithm, we ran a set of experiments on the MovieLens data set, described in subsection 2.1. The choice of this particular data set is not restrictive, since it is a widely used standard benchmark for recommender system techniques and its structure is typical of the most common applicative scenarios. In fact we can apply ItemRank every time we have a set of users (U) rating a set of items or products (I that is the generic notation for M), if we can model our recommendation problem this way (or in any equivalent form) it will be possible to use ItemRank to rank items according to user preferences. We chose an experimental setup and performance index that is the same as used in [Fouss et al., 2005], this way we can directly compare our algorithm with some of the most promising scoring algorithms we found in related literature (CT, L+ and so on), having many points of contact with ItemRank ”philosophy”. We split MovieLens data set as described in [Sarwar et al., 2002], in order to obtain 5 different subsets, then we applied ItemRank 5 times (5-fold cross validation). Each time, one of the 5 subsets is used as the test set and the remaining 4 sub sets have been merged to form a training set. At the end we computed the average result across all 5 trials. So we have 5 splittings, each uses 80% of the ratings for the training set (that is 80, 000 ratings) and 20% for the test set (the remaining 20, 000 ratings), that is exactly the same way tests have been performed in [Fouss et al., 2005]. The performance index we used is the degree of agreement (DOA), which is a variant of Somers’D (see [Siegel and Castellan, 1988] for further details). DOA is a way of measuring how good is an item ranking (movie ranking in MovieLens case) for any given user. To compute DOA for a single user ui we need to deﬁne a set of movies N Wui ⊂ M that is the set of movies that are not in the training set, nor in the test set for user ui, so:

N W ui = M \ (Lui ∪ Tui )

Now we deﬁne the boolean function check order as:

check orderui (mj, mk) =

mj

mk

1 if IRui ≥ IRui

mj

mk

0 if IRui < IRui

where IRui mj is the score assigned to movie mj with respect to user ui preferences, by the algorithm we are testing. Then
we can compute individual DOA for user ui, that is:

DOAui =

(j∈Tu , k∈N Wu ) check orderui (mj , mk)

i

i

|Tui | · |N Wui |

So DOAui measures for user ui the percentage of movie pairs ranked in the correct order with respect to the total number of pairs, in fact a good scoring algorithm should rank the movies that have indeed been watched in higher positions than movies that have not been watched. A random ranking produces a degree of agreement of 50%, half of all the pairs are in correct order and the other half in bad order. An ideal

IJCAI-07 2769

ranking correspond to a 100% DOA. Two different global degree of agreement can be computed considering ranking for individual users: Macro-averaged DOA and micro-averaged DOA. The Macro-averaged DOA (or shortly Macro DOA) will be the average of individual degree of agreement for every user, so:

Macro DOA =

ui∈U DOAui |U |

The micro-averaged DOA (or shortly micro DOA) is the ratio between the number of movie pairs in the right order (for every user) and the total number of movie pairs checked (for every user), so it can be computed as:

micro DOA = ui∈U

(j∈Tui , k∈N Wui ) check orderui (mj , mk ) ui∈U |Tui | · |N Wui |

Then micro DOA is something like a weighted averaging of

individual DOA values. In fact the bigger is set Tui for a

given user ui, the more important is the individual DOAui

contribution to micro DOA global computation. Macro DOA

and micro DOA have been evaluated for every experiment we

ran. We summarize experimental results in table 1 and 2. In

table 1 we compare ItemRank performances to a simpliﬁed

version of the same algorithm, in order to highlight the im-

portance of the information hidden in the Correlation Matrix

C. ItemRank with the binary graph is identical to classical

ItemRank (described in section 3) but there is a key differ-

ence in the way we build matrix C (we denote the simpliﬁed

version as Cbin), in this case it is obtained by normalizing a

˜ ˜bin

C˜bin

bin

i,j

binary version of C (C ), so we have: Ci,j = ωj where

C˜bin
i,j

can

be

computed

as:

C˜bin =
i,j

1 if Ui,j > 0 0 if Ui,j = 0

In other words if we compute ItemRank with binary graph,

we are weighting every correlation edge connecting two items

in the same way, no matter the number of co-occurrences in

user

preference

lists

for

these

items,

since

Cbin
i,j

correspond

to

the weight of edge (mi, mj) in the Correlation Graph GC we

use for information propagation.

Table 1 clearly shows the usefulness of a properly weighted

Correlation Matrix C compared to Cbin. This table provides

both Macro and micro DOA for every split and for Item-

Rank and its simpliﬁed version with binary graph: ItemRank

clearly works much better when we use a proper Correlation

Matrix. For example, if we look at Macro DOA mean values,

ItemRank with Correlation Matrix C obtain +15.43 points (in

%) with respect to Cbin version. These are interesting results

because they conﬁrm our main hypothesis: ItemRank algo-

rithm ranks items according to the information extracted from

the Correlation Matrix (that is equivalent to the weighted Cor-

relation Graph) and the way we compute C entries is really

able to properly model relationships among evaluated items.

Finally table 2 shows a performance comparison among dif-

ferent scoring algorithm applied to MovieLens data set. We

brieﬂy described some of these algorithms in subsection 1.1, for further details see [Fouss et al., 2005]. For every tested algorithm we provide Macro DOA index, that has been computed for every technique as the average result across all 5 trials of 5-fold cross-validation. Moreover we provide the difference (in %) with performance obtained by the trivial MaxF algorithm and the standard deviation (STD) of this quantity. MaxF is our baseline for the task, it is a user independent scoring algorithm, it simply ranks the movies by the number of persons who watched them, movies are suggested to each person in order of decreasing popularity. So MaxF produces the same ranking for all the users. ItemRank performs better than any other considered technique obtaining +3.69 with respect to the baseline and a very good standard deviation (0.31). In this test ItemRank also perform better than L+ algorithm by obtaining a Macro DOA value of 87.76 versus 87.23 for L+ and also a better standard deviation. In addition it is worth to note that ItemRank is less complex than other proposed algorithms with respect to memory usage and computational cost too, as already argued in subsection 3.1.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we present a random–walk based scoring algorithm, which can be used to recommend products according to user preferences. We compared our algorithm with other state-of-the-art ranking techniques on MovieLens data set. ItemRank performs better than the other algorithms we compared to and, at the same time, it is less complex than other proposed algorithms with respect to memory usage and computational cost too. Future research topics include the experimentation of the algorithm on different applications. We are now working on a extension of ItemRank. The version presented so far is able to handle the recommendation task as a item scoring/ranking problem. But we can face the problem from the regression point of view too. So we expect ItemRank 2.0 will also be able to produce expected satisfaction prediction for a given recommendation, other than product ranking.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Giuliano Testa for running the experiments.
References
[Brand, 2005] M. Brand. A random walks perspective on maximizing satisfaction and proﬁt. In 2005 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, 2005.
[Breese et al., 1998] J. S. Breese, D. Heckerman, and C. Kadie. Empirical analysis of predictive algorithms for collaborative ﬁltering. In 14th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI-98), pages 43–52, July 1998.
[Canny, 2002] J. Canny. Collaborative ﬁltering with privacy via factor analysis. In IEEE Conference on Security and Privacy, May 2002.
[Chebotarev and Shamis, 1997] P. Chebotarev and E. Shamis. The matrix-forest theorem and measuring relations in small social groups. Automation and Remote Control, 58(9):15051514, 1997.

IJCAI-07 2770

SPLIT 1 SPLIT 2 SPLIT 3 SPLIT 4 SPLIT 5
Mean

ItemRank micro DOA Macro DOA

87.14 86.98

87.73 87.61

87.20

87.69

87.08 86.91

87.47 88.28

87.06

87.76

ItemRank (binary graph) micro DOA Macro DOA

71.00 70.94

72.48 72.91

71.17

72.98

70.05 70.00

71.51 71.78

70.63

72.33

Table 1: Performance comparison between ItemRank and its simpliﬁed version with binary Correlation Graph.

Macro DOA difference with MaxF (in %)
STD of the difference with MaxF

MaxF 84.07
0 0

CT 84.09 +0.02 0.01

PCA CT 84.04 -0.03 0.76

One-way 84.08 +0.01 0.01

Return 72.63 -11.43 1.06

L+ 87.23 +3.16 0.84

ItemRank 87.76 +3.69 0.31

Katz 85.83 +1.76 0.24

Dijkstra 49.96 -34.11 1.52

Table 2: Comparison among different scoring algorithm applied to MovieLens data set.

[Chebotarev and Shamis, 1998] P. Chebotarev and E. Shamis. On proximity measures for graph vertices. Automation and Remote Control, 59(10):14431459, 1998.
[Fouss et al., 2005] F. Fouss, A. Pirotte, J. M. Renders, and M. Sarens. A novel way of computing dissimilarities between nodes of a graph, with application to collaborative ﬁltering. In IEEE / WIC / ACM International Joint Conference on Web Intelligence, pages 550–556, 2005.
[Goldberg et al., 2001] K. Goldberg, T. Roeder, D. Gupta, and C. Perkins. Eigentaste: A constant time collaborative ﬁltering algorithm. Information Retrieval, 4(2):133151, 2001.
[Golub and Loan, 1996] G. Golub and C. Van Loan. Matrix Computations. The Johns Hopkins University Press, third edition, 1996.
[Grcar et al., 2005] M. Grcar, B. Fortuna, D. Mladenic, and M. Grobelnik. Knn versus svm in the collaborative ﬁltering framework. In ACM WebKDD 2005 Taming evolving, Expanding and Multi-faceted Web Clickstreams Workshop, 2005.
[Gyongyi et al., 2004] Z. Gyongyi, H. Garcia-Molina, and J. Pedersen. Combating web spam with trustrank. Technical report, Stanford University, 2004.
[Haveliwala, 2002] T. Haveliwala. Topic-sensitive pagerank. In Eleventh International Conference on World Wide Web, 2002.
[Kamvar et al., 2003a] S. Kamvar, T. Haveliwala, C. Manning, and G. Golub. Extrapolation methods for accelerating pagerank computations. In Twelfth International Conference on World Wide Web, 2003.
[Kamvar et al., 2003b] S. Kamvar, M. Schlosser, and H. Garcia-Molina. The eigentrust algorithm for reputation management in p2p networks. In Twelfth International Conference on World Wide Web, 2003.

[Langville and Meyer, 2003] A. Langville and C. Meyer. Deeper inside pagerank. Internet Mathematics, 1(3):335– 380, 2003.
[Miller et al., 2002] B. Miller, J. Riedl, and J. Konstan. Grouplens for usenet: Experiences in applying collaborative ﬁltering to a social information system. In C. Leug and D. Fisher, editors, From Usenet to CoWebs: Interacting with Social Information Spaces. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[Norris, 1997] J. Norris. Markov Chains. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[Page et al., 1998] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web. Technical report, Stanford University, 1998.
[Sarwar et al., 2001] B. M. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. A. Konstan, and J. Riedl. Item-based collaborative ﬁltering recommendation algorithms. In 10th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW10), May 2001.
[Sarwar et al., 2002] B. M. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl. Recommender systems for large-scale ecommerce: Scalable neighborhood formation using clustering. In Fifth International Conference on Computer and Information Technology, 2002.
[Schafer et al., 2001] J. Schafer, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl. Electronic commerce recommender applications. Journal of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, January 2001.
[Shardanand and Maes, 1995] U. Shardanand and P. Maes. Social information ﬁltering: Algorithms for automating ”word of mouth”. In CHI 95, 1995.
[Siegel and Castellan, 1988] S. Siegel and J. Castellan. Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[White and Smyth, 2003] S. White and P. Smyth. Algorithms for estimating relative importance in networks. In Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data mining, page 26627, 2003.

IJCAI-07 2771

