See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/269776374
A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation
Article in Knowledge and Information Systems · December 2014
DOI: 10.1007/s10115-014-0808-1

CITATIONS
226
3 authors:
Hai-Long Nguyen Nanyang Technological University 15 PUBLICATIONS 873 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Wee Keong Ng Nanyang Technological University 449 PUBLICATIONS 7,188 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

READS
5,680
Yew-Kwong Woon Airbus Group 24 PUBLICATIONS 583 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Scalable Energy-Efficient Context Aware Distributed Mobile Data Analytics Platform View project Concept Drift Definition View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Hai-Long Nguyen on 20 December 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation
Hai-Long Nguyen and Wee-Keong Ng Nanyang Technological University, Singapore and Yew-Kwong Woon EADS Innovation Works, Singapore
Nowadays, with the advance of technology, many applications generate huge amounts of data streams at very high speed. Examples include network traﬃc, web click streams, video surveillance, and sensor networks. Data stream mining has become a hot research topic. Its goal is to extract hidden knowledge/patterns from continuous data streams. Unlike traditional data mining where the dataset is static and can be repeatedly read many times, data stream mining algorithms face many challenges and have to satisfy constraints such as bounded memory, single-pass, real-time response, and concept-drift detection. This paper presents a comprehensive survey of the stateof-the-art data stream mining algorithms. It identiﬁes mining constraints and proposes a general model for data stream mining, and depicts the relationship between traditional data mining and data stream mining. Furthermore, it analyzes the advantages and limitations of data stream algorithms, and suggests potential areas for future research.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: []: General Terms: Additional Key Words and Phrases:
1. INTRODUCTION
Traditional data mining research mostly focused on mining resident and static data repositories. However, technological developments give rise to the emergence of data streams and changed the way people store, communicate and process data. Nowadays, many organizations generate large amounts of data at higher speed than ever. For example, on a daily basis, Google handles more than 100 million searches, NASA satellites generate around 1.5 TB images, and WalMart records more than 20 million transactions. The new “intensive data” research problem is: How can one model an inﬁnite amount of continuous, rapid, and time-evolving data streams with a time-critical requirement?
In this survey, we focus on clustering and classiﬁcation of data stream as they are the two most frequent forms of data mining. Clustering aims to group a dataset into subsets (clusters), where data objects within a cluster are ‘similar’ and data objects in diﬀerent clusters are ‘dissimilar’ with respect to a given similarity measure. Classiﬁcation is the process of ﬁnding a general model from known data, and then using this model to predict class labels for new data objects. Readers may ﬁnd a good introduction of traditional data mining in a book of Jiawei Han [Han 2005].
There are much published work on data stream mining, including surveys that give overviews of various approaches. Gaber et al. introduced an illustrative survey
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY, Pages 1–0??.

2 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
with theoretical foundations and basic algorithms on data stream mining [Gaber et al. 2005]. However, it may be hard to understand the survey as the authors did not give any clear distinction among these algorithms. From a statistical point of view, Gama and Rodrigues [Gama and Rodrigues 2009] focused on illustrating examples of data stream mining with speciﬁc algorithms and applications. Unfortunately, the presented algorithms are quite outdated. Aggarwal [Aggarwal 2009] attempted to give a broader overview of data stream mining, where more mining tasks and real applications were discussed. Nevertheless, it does not give readers a comprehensive understanding of current data stream mining methods.
In this paper, we introduce a comprehensive survey of data stream clustering and classiﬁcation algorithms. We present preliminaries and overview of data stream mining in Section 2. Then, we discuss in details state-of-the-art algorithms, including their merits and limitations. We thoroughly classify them into diﬀerent categories based on their approaches and derive the relationships between traditional mining algorithms and stream mining algorithms in Sections 3 and 4. We also analyze capabilities of each algorithm in terms of addressing constraints in a data stream setting. Finally, we discuss future research in Section 5 and conclude the survey in Section 6.
1.1 Sample Applications & Software of Data Stream Mining
Applications:
—Mining query streams: Searching the Web to retrieve information has become an essential activity of our everyday life. Existing search engines such as Google, Bing, and Yahoo handle millions of queries on a daily basis. Mining query streams to provide users better searching results has attracted much research work. For example, Zeng et al. clustered Web search results to facilitate users’ quick browsing through search results [Zeng et al. 2004]. Users generally enter very short text queries, which may produce imprecise searching results due to users’ own ambiguity. Chien and Immorlica studied temporal correlation among text queries over a period of time and reﬁne users’ search by suggesting alternative queries [Chien and Immorlica 2005].
—Network monitoring: Internet includes many routers that are connected and communicate with each other by send IP packets. To manage such networks, we need to analysis traﬃc data to discover usage patterns and unusual activities in real time. Traﬃc data are recorded in the form of log ﬁles at many levels, such as packet logs containing source and destination IP addresses; ﬂow logs storing the number of packets sent, start time, end time, and protocol; and SNMP logs aggregate the number of bytes sent over each link every few minutes [Muthukrishnan 2003]. An example of network management is to detect and prevent malicious attacks in a large Internet service provider network. A data stream classiﬁer is required to classify in real time diﬀerent kinds of attacks, such as denial-of-service (DOS), unauthorized access from a remote machine (R2L), unauthorized access to local super-user privileges (U2R), surveillance and other probing attacks.
—Sensor networks: A sensor network consists of spatially distributed autonomous sensors that cooperatively monitor an environment. These sensors can sense physical values about the environment, such as temperature, sound, vibration,
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 3

pressure, humidity and light; they can cooperatively pass their data through the network to a center. Sensor networks are involved in many real-life applications, such as, traﬃc monitoring, smart homes, habitat monitoring, and healthcare [Gama and Gaber 2007]. For example, modern hospitals are equipped with patient monitoring system to improve health care quality and staﬀ productivity. Many body sensors, which are connected to critically ill patients, can produce massive physiological data, such as temperature, electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry, and blood pressure. Since sensor devices only store updated data and human eyes cannot detect these signal subtleties, the system must analyze healthcare data streams in real time and extract meaningful information for medical professionals, such as clinical rules to identify signiﬁcant events [Sow et al. 2010].
—Social network streams: Online social networks (OSNs) have become more and more popular; for example, Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn have millions of active users. Such networks generate tremendous online data streams, such as text, multimedia, linkage, interaction. There is much research on social network mining. For example, stream clustering methods are used to detect communities, and monitor their evolution in social networks. They can explain how communities emerge, expand, shrink, and evolve in a social network. Moreover, stream classiﬁcation algorithm help to classify diﬀerent types of users, or categorize discussion topics in social networks.
Software: There is some useful, open-source software for data stream mining research.
—WEKA1: WEKA is the most well-known data mining software within the academic environment. WEKA includes a collection of learning algorithms such as data pre-processing, classiﬁcation, regression, clustering, association rules, and visualization.
—Massive Online Analysis (MOA)2: MOA is based on the WEKA framework that is designed for data stream learning. It includes many online learning algorithms for evolving data streams; for example, very fast decision tree [Domingos and Hulten 2000], and ensemble learning [Oza 2005]. Moreover, MOA provides data stream generators, such as SEA concepts, STAGGER, and rotating hyper-plane.
—RapidMiner3: RapidMiner is another open-source software for data mining. RapidMiner is more powerful than WEKA as it includes all algorithms in WEKA and other advanced algorithms. Moreover, it is more intuitive as it is able deﬁne a mining process as a series of operators and provides more visualization tools.
2. OVERVIEW OF DATA STREAM MINING
We deﬁne a data stream DS as a sequence of data objects or samples: DS = (x1, x2, ..., xi, ...), where xi is the i -th arrived data object. Each data object xi has a label yi ∈ C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} when classifying data stream, and there is no label when clustering data stream.

1http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka 2moa.cs.waikato.ac.nz 3http://rapid-i.com

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

4 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

2.1 Constraints & a general model
Data streams have intrinsic characteristics, such as possibly inﬁnite volume, chronological order and dynamical changes. For example, Google processes more than 100 million searches daily, each of which is attached with a time stamp; and these searches are changed according to diﬀerent hot topics at diﬀerent times. TODO: examples don’t quite illustrate

Number of passes Time Memory Number of concepts Result

Traditional Data Mining multiple unlimited unlimited one accurate

Data Stream Mining single
real-time bounded multiple approximate

Table I. Comparisons between traditional data mining and data stream mining.
Table I shows comparisons between traditional data mining and data stream mining. Traditional data mining is able to scan datasets many times; execute with unlimited time and memory; has only one concept; and needs to produce fairly accurate results. On the other hand, data stream mining may produce approximate results and has to satisfy constraints, such as single-pass, real-time response, bounded memory, and concept-drift detection:
—Single-pass : Unlike traditional data mining that may read static datasets repetitively many times, each sample in a data stream is examined at most once and cannot be backtracked.
—Real-time response: Many data stream applications such as stock market prediction require real-time response. The amount of time for processing the data and providing decision must be fast.
—Bounded memory : The amount of arriving data is extremely large or potentially inﬁnite. As we may only compute and store a small summary of the data streams and possibly throw away the rest of the data; approximate results are acceptable.
—Concept-drift detection: In data streams, concept drifts refer to the situation when the discovered patterns (or the underlying data distribution) change over time. A formal deﬁnition of concept-drifts was introduced by Kelly et al. [Kelly et al. 1999]. Here, a concept at time instant t is deﬁned as a set of probabilities of the classes and class-conditionals:
CD = {(P (c1), P (xt|c1)); (P (c2), P (xt|c2)); . . . ; (P (cm), P (xt|cm))}.
By monitoring changes in this set of probabilities CD, a data stream model is able to detect and adapt itself according to concept drifts .
To help readers understand an overview of data stream mining, we propose a general model of data stream algorithms in Figure 1. When a data stream comes, a buﬀer is used to store the most recent data. The stream mining engine reads the buﬀer to create a synopsis of the data in memory. In order to maintain the synopsis, the system may apply diﬀerent time-window and computational approaches. When certain criteria are triggered; for example, a users request or after a certain time
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 5

Computational Approaches
Data Models

Synopsis in Memory

Statistical Bound

…

…

… Data Stream …

…

…

Buffer

Stream Mining Engine

Approximate Answer

Fig. 1. A general model for data stream mining.
lapse; the stream mining engine will process the synopsis and output approximate results. In general, most data stream algorithms are derived and adapted from traditional mining algorithms.
2.2 Time Window
As data streams are potentially inﬁnite, it is possible to only able to process a portion of the entire data streams. This interesting portion is deﬁned as a time-window of data objects. W [i, j] = (xi, xi+1, ..., xj), where i < j. There are diﬀerent types of time-windows: landmark window, sliding window, fading window and tilted-time window.
Landmark window In the landmark window, we are interested in the entire data stream from starting time instant 1 to the current time instant tc; the window is W [1, tc]. Using the landmark window, all transactions in the window are equally important; there is no diﬀerence between past and present data. However, as data stream evolves continuously, the model built with old data objects may become inconsistent with the new ones. In order to emphasize recent data, one may apply the sliding window, tilted window, or fading window variants. Sliding window In the sliding window variant W [tc−w+1, tc], we are only interested in the w most recent transactions; the others are eliminated. The mining result is dependent on the size of the window w. If w is too large and there is a concept drift, the window possibly contains outdated information and the accuracy of the model decreases. If w is small, the window may have deﬁcient data, the model over-ﬁts and suﬀers from large variances. Previous work considers a ﬁxed value for the size of the sliding window speciﬁed by users or an experimental value. Recently, there are proposals for ﬂexible sliding windows where the size of the window changes according to the accuracy of the model [Bifet 2010; Last 2002]. When the accuracy is high, the window extends; and when the accuracy is low, the window shrinks. Fading window
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

6 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
Starting time

. . .

Data Streams

(a) Landmark window

current time

Starting time

... ...

w
Data Streams (b) Sliding window

current time
. . .

Starting time
. . .

weights
Data Streams (c) Fading window (λ = 0.9)

Starting time
current time
... ...

31 days
...

24 hrs
...

Data Streams (d) Tilted-time window

4 qtrs
current time
. . .

Fig. 2. Examples of time-windows.

In the fading window variant, each data object is assigned a diﬀerent weight according to its arrival time so that new transactions recieve higher weights than old ones [Cao et al. 2006; Chen and Tu 2007; Han 2005]. Using the fading window, we reduce the eﬀect (importance) of old and out-dated transactions on the mining results. A decreasing exponential function f (△t) = λ△t (0 < λ < 1) is usually used in the fading model. In this function, △t is the age of a data object that is equal to time diﬀerence between the current time and its arrival time. The fading window needs to choose a suitable fading parameter λ, which is typically set in the range [0.99, 1] in real applications.
Tilted-time window The tilted-time window variant is somewhere between the fading window and sliding window variants [Aggarwal et al. 2003; Han 2005]. It applies diﬀerent levels of granularity with regard to the recency of data. One is more interested in recent data at ﬁne scale than long-term data from the past at coarse scale. Tilted-time window provides a nice tradeoﬀ between storage requirements and accuracy. It approximately stores the entire dataset and considers all the transactions at the same. However, the model may become unstable after running for a long time. For example, the tree structure in FP-Stream [Chris et al. 2003] will become very large over time, and the process of updating and scanning over the tree may degrade its performance. Similarly, the micro-structures in On-Demand Classiﬁcation [Aggarwal et al. 2006] will become larger and larger that may give rise to the problem of low-purity clustering with large micro-clusters [Zhou et al. 2008]. Figure 2 shows examples of four diﬀerent time-windows. For fading window, λ is set to 0.9; the weights of data objects decreases. For tilted-time window, we store the 4 most recent quarters of an hour, then the last 24 hours, and last 31 days.
2.3 Computational Approaches
Besides various time-window variants, there are computational approaches to process the data streams. Incremental Learning
Incremental learning is another computational approach for data streams [Dang et al. 2009; Guha et al. 2004; Guha et al. 2000; Hulten et al. 2001; Leite et al.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 7
2009; Lhr and Lazarescu 2009; Sattar et al. 2009; Smith and Alahakoon 2009; Street and Kim 2001]. In this approach, the model incrementally evolves to adapt to changes in incoming data. There are two ways to update the model: window and data instance. Street et al. deployed an ensemble of classiﬁers for data stream [Street and Kim 2001]. It evaluated a window of incoming data and adapted the model by adjusting the weight of each classiﬁer or replacing an old classiﬁer with an updated one. The incremental approach has the advantage of providing mining results instantly, but it requires much computational resources.
Two-phase Learning Two-phase learning, also known as online-oﬄine learning, is a common computational approach in data streams [Aggarwal et al. 2003; 2006; Cao et al. 2006; Chen and Tu 2007; Kranen et al. 2010; Park and Lee 2004; 2007; Rai et al. 2009; Seidl et al. 2009; Wan et al. 2009]. The basic idea is to divide the mining process into two phases. In the ﬁrst phase (online phase), a synopsis of data is updated in a real-time manner. In the second phase (oﬄine phase), the mining process is performed on the stored synopsis whenever a user sends a request. The two-phase learning approach is able to process data streams at very high speed. However, its limitation is that users must wait until the mining results are available.
3. CLUSTERING
Clustering or data segmentation is the process of grouping objects into diﬀerent sets called clusters. The goal is that data objects in the same cluster are similar and are dissimilar to data objects in other clusters. Clustering is a well-studied problem, and many clustering methods have been proposed in the literature.
As mentioned in the general model (Figure 1), data stream algorithms typically maintain synopses of data streams using diﬀerent time-window and computational approaches. Furthermore, data stream algorithms generally extend traditional algorithms to work for data streams with the goal to satisfy constraints, such as bounded memory, single-pass, real-time processing, and concept drifts. Both traditional and data stream clustering methods can be classiﬁed into the following same categories: partitioning methods, hierarchical methods, density-based methods, gridbased methods, and model-based methods.
To give readers a broad overview of data stream clustering, we start with a quick review of traditional clustering, then discuss the most representative data stream clustering algorithms. We also identify the connection between traditional clustering and data stream clustering, and discuss their advantages as well as limitations.
3.1 Traditional Data Clustering
Partitioning methods: A partitioning method constructs k partitions where each partition represents a cluster. Using a pre-deﬁned parameter k, a partition clustering method usually applies some heuristic to initialize partitions. Then, it iteratively reassigns objects from one group to another group in order to minimize its objective function. The most popular partitioning methods are k-means and k-medoids.
- k-means: In the k-means method, each cluster is represented by a mean or a center. First, it randomly selects k objects for the k means from the dataset. Next, every object is assigned to the cluster whose center is closest. Then, the mean of
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

8 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

each cluster is recomputed for the next iteration. The process stops whenever its criterion function converges. Typically, the square-error function is used to measure the compactness of the clusters.

∑k ∑

f=

| x − mi |,

i=1 x∈Ci

where x is the data object and mi is the mean of cluster Ci. The k-means method is quite simple, easy to implement, relatively scalable and eﬃcient. However, it is only suitable for ﬁnding spherical-shaped clusters and is sensitive to noise and outliers as such kind of data greatly distort the mean value.
- k-medoids: To overcome the outlier sensitivity problem of the k-means method, the k −medoids method chooses a data object, called medoid, to represent a cluster. The basic idea of k-medoids algorithm is similar to the k-means algorithm; data objects are reassigned to another cluster that has the nearest medoid, such as in PAM [Kaufman and Rousseeuw 1990]. The objective function becomes the sum square-error of all the objects to their nearest medoids. This process is performed repeatedly by a swapping method that tries to improve the clustering result by replacing the medoid with a non-representative object. CLARAN (Clustering LARge Application) [Ng and Han 2002] is an extension of PAM to deal with large datasets. Instead of processing the entire dataset, it uses a sampling-based method to select a small portion of the dataset and then performs the PAM method on this selected sample.
Hierarchical methods: A hierarchical method aims to group data objects into a hierarchical tree of clusters, which can be presented by a dendrogram. A dendrogram is a visual tool to show the way clusters are created. There are two main approaches in hierarchical clustering: agglomerative (bottom-up) and divisive (top-down) approaches. In the agglomerative approach, each data object is initially set as a single cluster and then these clusters are merged together to form larger and larger ones. This process repeats until a single cluster or certain termination conditions are satisﬁed. The division approach starts by grouping all data objects in one single cluster. It then divides the cluster into smaller ones until each data object forms its own cluster or until certain termination conditions are satisﬁed. Most hierarchical methods are agglomerative; they diﬀer only in their deﬁnition of the similarity between clusters, such as minimum distance, maximum distance, mean distance, or average distance. These distances have diﬀerent eﬀects on the performance of the algorithms. For example, maximum distance will produce high-quality clusters, but it is sensitive to outliers and requires more computations. Some representative algorithms are BIRCH [Zhang et al. 1996], CURE [Guha et al. 1998], ROCK [Guha et al. 1999], and CHAMELEON [Karypis et al. 1999]. Density-based methods: Discovering arbitrary-shaped clusters is quite challenging, especially using the partitioning method. Density-based clustering methods are proposed to resolve such problems. In this approach, clusters are considered as dense regions of objects and are separated by sparse regions with low density in the data space. - DBSCAN [Martin et al. 1996]: DBSCAN is a popular density-based cluster-

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 9
ing method that deﬁnes a cluster as a maximal set of density-connected points. An object p is called a core object or a dense object if its ϵ-neighborhood has at least M inP ts objects. All objects in the ϵ-neighborhood of p are density-reachable by p. DBSCAN ﬁrst creates a list of core objects, and a new cluster with each core object. Then, these clusters are iteratively extended and merged using the density-reachability relation. The process stops whenever clusters cannot be extended anymore. Hence, ﬁnal clusters may have arbitrary shapes.
- OPTICS [Ankerst et al. 1999]: OPTICS is an extension of DBSCAN that is less sensitive to user-deﬁned parameters. A core point p in the OPTICS algorithm is deﬁned together with its core-distance ϵ′ that deﬁnes the smallest neighborhood with M inpts points. The reachability distance between an object q and a core object p is the larger value of the core-distance of p and their distance. OPTICS records the reachability distance of every core point and orders data points in such a way that the (i + 1)th point has the smallest reachability distance to the ith one. By plotting the order of data points with regard to the reachability distance, a reachability plot (a special kind of dendrogram) can be created to visualize the clustering structures at several levels of details.
- PreDeCon [Bohm et al. 2004]: Bohm et al. extended the DBSCAN algorithm using a preference distance measure to capture the subspace of each cluster. In this way, PreDeCon works with high-dimensional data. The preference distance is simply a weighted Euclidean distance that ignores attributes having variant values greater than a threshold value. Moreover, deﬁnitions in DBSCAN (such as ϵneighborhood, core point, density-reachable, etc) are adapted using the preference distance. Similar to DBSCAN, PreDeCon constructs clusters by extending and merging its core points. PreDeCon shows better performance than DBSCAN in high-dimensional datasets such as biological datasets.
- DENCLUE [Alexander et al. 1998] : DENCLUE is a combination of densitybased and grid-based approaches. It divides the high-dimensional data space into grid cells, each of which contains information of data points within the cell. DENCLUE generalizes the deﬁnition of density by using a mathematical inﬂuence function, such as a square wave inﬂuence function or a Gaussian inﬂuence function. The density of an object is deﬁned as the sum of inﬂuence functions from surrounding data objects. The local maxima of density function is called density attractor; arbitrary shape clusters are constructed by locating density attractors and their attracted neighbors.
Grid-based methods:
Grid-based clustering methods quantize data space into a multi-resolution grid structure. The grid structure contains many cells, each of which has a subspace and stores summary information of data objects within the subspace. By processing this data structure, clustering methods are generally fast and are independent of the size of the dataset.
- STING [Wang et al. 1997]: STING is an example of a grid-based clustering method for mining spatial data. STING divides the data space into rectangular cells and creates a hierarchical structure having diﬀerent levels of granularity. Statistical information is stored in each cell, such as the mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, and the type of distribution. Statistical information of higher level cells
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

10 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
can be easily computed from lower level cells. STING only needs a single scan of the dataset to generate the hierarchical grid structure with complexity O(N ), where N is the total number of data objects. Moreover, the query processing time is O(G), where G is the total number of ﬁnest grid cells.
- WaveCluster [Sheikholeslami et al. 2000]: WaveCluster is another grid-based clustering method for detecting arbitrarily-shaped clusters. The key idea of WaveCluster is to apply wavelet transformation to make the clusters more distinct and salient in the transformed space. WaveCluster is computationally eﬃcient and is able to detect the clusters at diﬀerent scales due to the multi-resolution property of wavelet transformation. It is robust to outliers and the order of input data. However, WaveCluster is unsuitable for high-dimensional data since wavelet transform is applied to each dimension of the feature space.
Model-based methods: In the above clustering algorithms, clusters are formed by optimizing certain criteria that rely on the distance among data objects. In the model-based approach, data are assumed to be generated by a mixture of probability distributions and each component of the mixture represents a cluster. Modelbased clustering methods use a generative statistical model and then try to optimize the likelihood between data and this model.
- Expectation-Maximization (EM) [Dempster et al. 1977]: EM-based algorithm is a soft clustering method; it is robust to noise and is able to handle missing data. In the initial step, the EM-based algorithm guesses the parameters of the model, such as the maximum number of clusters and their centers. Then, it iteratively performs two alternating steps: the Expectation (E) step and the Maximization (M) step. In the E step, for each data object, we use current parameters of the model to calculate its membership for each cluster. In the M step, we re-estimate the model parameters; for example, re-calculate the new centers to maximize the likelihood between the model and the assumed model.
- Self-Organizing Map (SOM): Introduced by Kohonen in 1990, SOM is one of the most popular neural network methods for clustering. SOM can be viewed as a nonlinear projection from high-dimensional data space onto a lower-dimensional regularized grid. SOM ﬁrst randomizes the weight vectors of the grid. Then, for each incoming data object, it ﬁnds the best-matching unit and scales its neighbor unit. SOM assumes that there are some topologies among the input data objects; and the grid will eventually take on these topologies. The organization of SOM forms a feature map that can be used to visualize the dataset and explore discovered clusters.
3.2 Data Stream Clustering
Partitioning methods: - STREAM [O’Callaghan et al. 2002]: STREAM is one of the ﬁrst data stream
algorithms. It addresses the bounded memory and single-pass constraints. It uses a divide-and-conquer strategy to perform clustering incrementally and hierarchically. The STREAM algorithm works in a window mode. When an amount of data objects ﬁts into main memory, it is clustered using LSEARCH, an advanced k-medoids algorithm. Intermediate medians with its weight representing result clusters are stored. The process is repeated for subsequent windows. The LSEARCH is recursively applied to the representative medians. Together with a sampling
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 11
method, STREAM is able to perform clustering with limited time and memory. However, it fails to detect concept drifts and discover non-spherical clusters, and is sensitive to parameter k due to the intrinsic properties of k-medoids.
Hierarchical methods:
- CluStream [Aggarwal et al. 2003]: CluStream extends the traditional clustering method BIRCH [Zhang et al. 1996] for data streams. CluStream uses micro-clusters to store the summary of data streams. A micro-cluster is an extension of the Clustering Feature in BIRCH with two more dimensions: time and square of time. It applies the tilted time window to optimize the number of stored snapshots (the status of micro-clusters in the data stream). CluStream follows the online-oﬄine approach, which is similar to the multi-phase clustering technique in BIRCH. In the online phase, it continually maintains a set of q micro-clusters in the data stream. In the oﬄine phase, it performs k-means to cluster the stored q microclusters. CluStream analyzes the evolution of clusters by using additional property to extract information of micro-clusters during a speciﬁc time range.
Based on CluStream’s framework, many extensions have been proposed. HPStream [Aggarwal et al. 2004] addresses the problem of high dimensional data streams by deploying a projection technique to select the best attribute set for each cluster (subspace clustering). Similar to CluStream, HPStream maintains microcluster structures as synopses of data streams. Furthermore, each micro-cluster consists of a set of relevant attributes, which can be considered its subspace. When a new data instance arrives, the average Manhattan distance between the new instance and each cluster is computed. Only relevant attributes of the clusters are utilized in the distance computation. Then, the new instance is assigned to the closest cluster if their distance does not exceed a limiting range, a multiple of the cluster’s radius. Moreover, the statistical properties of the closest cluster are also updated. HPStream only maintains a ﬁx number of micro-clusters. When the number of clusters reaches a threshold value, it removes the oldest cluster to give space for a new one.
SWClustering [Zhou et al. 2008] indentiﬁes a problem that the clustering results of CluStream may degrade after running for a long time. For example, when the center of a micro-cluster gradually shifts, CluStream maintains the micro-cluster with growing radius, instead of splitting it into many micro-clusters. To summarize data streams, SWClustering creates a Temporal Cluster Feature (TCF) for a sliding window. The TCF is similar to a micro-cluster; the only diﬀerence is that TCF stores the latest timestamp, while micro-cluster stores the sum of timestamps. An Exponential Histogram of Cluster Features (EHCF), a collection of TCFs, is used to capture the evolution of individual clusters. SWClustering not only produces more qualiﬁed clustering due to the ﬁne granularity of EHCFs, it also has better performance than CluStream in terms of running time and memory usage. E-Stream [Udommanetanakit et al. 2007] classiﬁes cluster evolution into ﬁve categories: appearance, disappearance, self evolution, merging, and splitting. It utilizes the fading model and cluster histograms to identify the type of cluster evolution.
- REPSTREAM [Lhr and Lazarescu 2009]: Inspired by CHAMELEON [Karypis et al. 1999], REPSTREAM is another graph-based hierarchical clustering approach for data streams. To identify clusters, REPSTREAM updates two sparse graphs
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

12 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
that are formed by connecting each vertex to its k-nearest vertices. The ﬁrst graph captures the connectivity relationship among coming data points and is used to select a set of representative vertices. The second graph of representative vertices helps to make clustering decisions at a higher level. REPSTREAM applies the fading window to diminish the eﬀect of old data. REPSTREAM keeps track of the connectivity between the representative vertices and performs merging or splitting according to their connectivity.
Density-based methods:
- DenStream [Cao et al. 2006]: DenStream is a density-based stream clustering algorithm that extends the DBSCAN algorithm. Similar to CluStream, DenStream uses micro-clusters to capture synopsis information of data streams; its online component continually updates the micro-clusters collection. Each micro-cluster has a center and a radius that are derived from its clustering feature vector. DenStream applies the fading model where elements of its feature vector decrease over time. Given threshold values for the weight and radius, there are three types of micro-clusters: a core micro-cluster, a potential core micro-cluster, and an outlier micro-cluster. For the oﬄine components, it applies DBSCAN on these kinds of micro-clusters; a cluster is created as a group of micro-clusters that are dense and close to another.
- OPTICS-Stream [Tasoulis et al. 2007]: OPTICS-Stream is an extension of the OPTICS algorithm for data streams. Similarly to DenStream, it uses micro-clusters and the fading model to construct the synopsis. The oﬄine component performs clustering by using the deﬁnitions of core-distance and reachability distance in OPTICS [Ankerst et al. 1999]. The reachability plot, which becomes a 3-D plot given the time dimension, can be used to visualize the changes of the cluster structures in the data stream over time.
- incPreDecon [Kriegel et al. 2011]: incPreDecon is an incremental version of the PreDeCon [Bohm et al. 2004] algorithm, which is designed to work for dynamic data. The algorithm supports two types of updates, a single instance update and batch update. Both updating methods share the same strategy. They ﬁrst identify a group of aﬀected objects, whose properties may be changed into one of the following cases: (i) core → non-core, (ii) non-core → core, and (iii) core → core but under diﬀerent preferences. Given new arriving data p, the group of aﬀected objects consists of reachable objects from p. Properties of these objects, as well as their clusters, are updated according. The ability of incPreDecon to work for data streams is still unclear as only experiments with relatively small datasets have been performed.
- D-Stream [Chen and Tu 2007]: D-Stream is a density-based clustering method for data streams. It can be considered as an extension of the DENCLUE algorithm [Alexander et al. 1998]. In D-Stream, each dimension is divided into p segments. With this, a grid of equal size hyper-rectangular cells is created. Similar to a microcluster, a grid cell in D-Stream is used to store synopsis information of data objects falling into it. As D-Stream uses the fading model to decrease the weight of cell over time, it periodically removes sparse grid cells to save memory and accelerate the mining process. D-Stream performs clustering upon a user request. A cluster is deﬁned as a group of adjacent dense grid cells.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 13
Grid-based methods:
- MR-Stream [Wan et al. 2009]: MR-Stream is a multi-resolution density-based clustering method for data stream. MR-Stream takes advantages of both D-Stream [Chen and Tu 2007] and STING [Wang et al. 1997]. MR-Stream proposes a tree of grid cells to capture the hierarchical structure of the data space. A deeper level tree node has higher granularity level. Similar to D-Stream, MR-Stream applies the fading model and periodically prunes sparse grid cells to save memory. Additionally, MR-Stream signiﬁcantly reduces the number of tree nodes by merging sibling nodes of a parent node if they are all dense or sparse. Thus, MR-Stream preserves more memory than D-Stream and accelerates the clustering process. Moreover, MR-Stream provides a better cluster result by extending the neighborhood range concept and supports a memory sampling method that helps users to detect when concept drifts occur.
- CellTree [Park and Lee 2004] : CellTree is another grid-based algorithm for data streams. It starts by partitioning the data space into a set of mutually exclusive equal size cells. When a weight of a cell is greater than a threshold value, the cell is dynamically divided into two intermediate cells using a hybrid-partition method that selects a better method between µ-partition and σ-partition methods. The µ-partition divides a dimension with the largest standard deviation, while the σpartition method choose to split a dimension with the smallest standard deviation. To save memory, CellTree prunes sparse cells with density less than the threshold value. CellTree has been extended to a better version Cell*Tree [Park and Lee 2007] that uses a B+Tree to store the synopses of data streams. The hybrid-partition method has a drawback that CellTree is not able to employ any indexing structure to access a speciﬁc grid cell immediately. In Cell*Tree, a dense grid cell is divided into a ﬁxed number of equal size grid cells, which are indexed easily based on its order. Moreover, Cell*Tree applies the fading model to emphasize the latest change of information in a data stream on the clusters.
Model-based methods:
- SWEM [Dang et al. 2009]: SWEM is an EM-based clustering algorithm for data streams using a sliding window. In SWEM, each micro-component is represented by a tuple consisting of a weight, a mean, and a covariance matrix. For the ﬁrst data window, SWEM applies the EM algorithm to obtain the converged parameters. Then, in the incremental phase, SWEM utilizes the converged parameters in the previous window of data object as the initial values for the mixture models’ parameters. If the two sets of parameters are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent; SWEM re-distributes components in the entire data space by splitting those micro-components with large variance and merging neighbor micro-components. SWEM also deploys the fading model to expire the statistic summarization of the micro components. In short, SWEM may be considered as an EM clustering using Mahalanobis distance with fading window.
- GCPSOM [Smith and Alahakoon 2009]: There are two important extensions of SOM: Growing self-organizing map (GSOM)[Alahakoon et al. 2000] and cellular probabilistic self-organizing map (CPSOM) [Chow and Sitao 2004]. In GSOM, there is no need to pre-specify the size of the output map; it dynamically grows nodes at the boundary of the map whenever its accumulated error exceeds a threshold.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

14 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

Computational Approaches A Incremental learning B Two-phase learning

Time windows 1 Landmark window 2 Sliding window 3 Fading window
4 Tilted-time window

Partitioning

K-Means

A

1

K-Medoids

CLARANS

STREAM

Hierarchical

AGNES

DIANA

BIRCH

B

4

ROCK

3

CURE

A

CHAMELON

OPTICS

B

3

Density- DBSCAN B 3 based

PreDeCon

A

1

DENCLUE

B

3

CluStream REPSTREAM
OPTICS-Stream Den-Stream incPreDeCon D-Stream

Grid-

STING

B

3

based WaveCluster

A

2

MR-Stream CELL-TREE
XWAVE

LSEARCH technique
HPStream SWClustering
E-Stream
Preference distance measure Multi-resolution + merging/pruning

Model-based

EM

A

3

SOM

A

3

SWEM GCPSOM

Traditional Clustering

Data Stream Clustering

Fig. 3. The relationships between traditional clustering methods and stream clustering methods.

CPSOM is an online algorithm and is suitable for large datasets. CPSOM uses a fading window to reduce the weight of the neuron state. Thuss, CPSOM may forget old patterns and adapt to new patterns as they appear. GCPSOM is a hybrid algorithm that aggregates the advantages of both the GSOM and CPSOM. Therefore, GCPSOM dynamically grows the feature map for clustering data streams and keeps track clusters as they evolve.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 15
3.3 Overall analysis
Previous sections have introduced many aspects of data stream mining, including constraints in data stream mining, time windows, and computational approaches. Many traditional and data stream clustering algorithms are also presented. Furthermore, we perform an overall analysis to summarize the above ideas and give readers a coherent view of data stream clustering. In Figure 3, we plot an intuitive diagram to outline the relationship between traditional clustering algorithms and data stream clustering algorithms. Traditional clustering methods are shown on the left if the diagram, and data stream clustering methods are on the right. Two schemata for categorizing data stream clustering methods are in the middle with two computational approaches and four time-windows.
Based on this diagram, we observe that most data stream clustering methods are adapted from traditional clustering methods but apply diﬀerent computational approaches and time windows. For example, STREAM extends the k-means algorithms with incremental computational approach and landmark window. The key idea of STREAM is to apply the LSEARCH technique to perform k-means incrementally and hierarchically. CluStream extends the BIRCH algorithm and applies the two-phase learning approach and tilted-time window. HPStream improves CluStream to work for high dimensional data streams; SWClustering enhances CluStream on long-term running, and E-Stream extends CluStream to classify diﬀerent types of concept drifts. REPSTREAM extends CHAMELEON algorithm with the incremental learning approach and fading window. Similarly, DenStream is an extension of DB-SCAN with the two-phase learning approach and fading window. incPreDeCon combines it with the preference distance measure to work with data streams. D-Stream inherits from DENCLUE; it has been extended into a multi-resolution approach with merging and splitting operations in MRStream. Moreover, CELL-TREE, XWAVE, SWEM, and GCPSOM are extensions of STING, WaveCluster, EM, and SOM respectively.
Although many clustering methods have been proposed, they are often unable to address all data stream mining constraints simultaneously, which are discussed in Section 2. For the concept-drift constraint, we establish two levels of how the algorithms respond to concept-drifts. The ﬁrst level, concept-drift adaptation, means that an algorithm may update with new concepts and remove outdated concepts. Most algorithms deploy the time windows to update fresh information. Therefore, they satisfy this criterion. However, those applying the landmark window do not. The second level, concept-drift classiﬁcation, indicates that an algorithm may detect and adapt properly to diﬀerent types of concept-drifts. For example, with cluster shifting or recurrence, information about the cluster be collected as much as possible; thus, we should extend the sliding window or retrieve historical information of recurrence clusters. Another example with cluster appearance/disapperance, a clustering algorithm should remove the least informative clusters (the least weight cluster or the farthest cluster from the new one), not the oldest one. Furthermore, we evaluate whether these algorithms can work for high-dimensional data streams. Table II summarizes the capabilities of previously reviewed data stream clustering techniques. We observe that only HPStream and incPreDecon can work with highdimensional data streams. E-Stream partly satisﬁes the concept-drift classiﬁcation
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

16 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

Bounded Memory Single-pass Real-time Response Concept-drift Adaptation Concept-drift Classiﬁcation High-dimensional Data

Algorithm

√√

STREAM [O’Callaghan et al. 2002]

√√√√

CluStream [Aggarwal et al. 2003]

√√√√

√

HPStream [Aggarwal et al. 2004]

√√√√

SWClustering [Zhou et al. 2008]

√√√√√

E-Stream [Udommanetanakit et al. 2007] √ √

RepStream [Lhr and Lazarescu 2009]

√√√√

OpticsStream [Tasoulis et al. 2007]

√√√√

Den-Stream [Cao et al. 2006] √ √ √

incPreDeCon [Kriegel et al. 2011]

√√√√

D-Stream [Chen and Tu 2007]

√√√√

MR-Stream [Wan et al. 2009]

√√

√

Cell-Tree [Park and Lee 2004]

√√√√

Cell*Tree [Park and Lee 2007]

√√√√

XWAVE [Guha et al. 2004]

√√√√

SWEM [Dang et al. 2009]

√√

√

GCPSOM [Smith and Alahakoon 2009]

Table II. Capabilities of data stream clustering algorithms.
constraint as it can distinguish diﬀerent types of cluster evolutions; however, it does not consider high dimensionality.
Besides the tradeoﬀs of time-windows and computational approaches in Section 2, it is worthy to note that traditional and data stream clustering algorithms share similar advantages and limitations. Table III illustrates the trade-oﬀs of each category of clustering techniques. For example, partitioning clustering algorithms are simple and relatively eﬃcient; however, they need to specify the number of clusters, and are unable to discover non-spherical clusters. Grid-based clustering methods are quite fast; they are able to discover arbitrary-shape clusters. Nevertheless, their clustering quality depends on grid granularity, and they are unsuitable for high-dimensional data streams.
4. CLASSIFICATION
Classiﬁcation is the process of ﬁnding a general model from past data to apply to new data. Classiﬁcation is performed in two steps: Learning step and testing step. In the learning step, the system tries to learn a model from a collection of data objects, called the training set. In the testing step, the model is used to assign a class label for unlabeled data objects in the testing set. There are many classiﬁcation techniques in the literature, such as the decision tree, Bayesian classiﬁcation, rulebased classiﬁcation, neural networks, support vector machines, k-nearest-neighbor and ensemble classiﬁers. In this section, we review several methods in traditional
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 17

Algorithm Partitioning
Hierarchical Density-based
Grid-based
Model-based

Advantages Simple and relatively eﬃcient. Terminate at a local optimum.
Derive more meaningful cluster structures.
Can ﬁnd arbitrary-shape clusters. Robust to noises.
Fast and can discover arbitraryshape clusters. Robust to noises.
Simple and can include domain knowledge.

Limitations Need to specify the number of clusters. Unable to discover non-spherical clusters. High complexity. Sensitive to the order of the data records. Need many parameters: density and noise thresholds. Diﬃcult to detect clusters with different densities. The clustering quality depends on the grid granularity. Unsuitable to high-dimensional data. Depends strongly on the assumed models.

Table III. Advantages and limitations of clustering approaches

and data stream classiﬁcation. Then, we outline their mutual relationships and present an overall analysis of these algorithms.
4.1 Traditional Classiﬁcation
Decision Tree: The decision tree classiﬁer is a popular data classiﬁcation method. It aims to
construct a decision tree where each interior node represents one attribute, and an edge to its child node corresponds to the possible values of its attribute. Each leaf stands for a group of data objects whose attribute values satisfy the speciﬁed ranges represented by the path from the root to the leaf.
Most decision trees are recursively constructed in a top-down manner with the greedy approach [Breiman et al. 1984; Quinlan 1986; 1993]. There are usually three basic steps to construct a decision tree: (i) select the best attribute to split, (ii) create a node and label it with the splitting attribute, and (iii) loop until certain conditions are met, such as all the training data belong to the same class or entropy threshold is exceeded.
Decision tree algorithms usually diﬀer in how they select the splitting attributes and prune the tree when it becomes too large. There are heuristics to ﬁnd the “best” splitting attributes, such as information gain in ID3 [Quinlan 1986], gain ratio in C4.5 [Quinlan 1993] (ID3’s successor), and the Gini index [Breiman et al. 1984]. Tree pruning methods are used to prevent data over-ﬁtting by removing redundant, least reliable branches. Thus, the pruned tree becomes smaller and simpler, and may classify testing data more quickly and accurately. Punning techniques can be applied; for example, pre-pruning to halt the tree’s construction early; postpruning to remove sub-trees from a “full grown” tree; and pessimistic pruning that uses error rate to decide when to stop the sub-tree pruning.
Decision trees are simple to understand and interpret. They are able to handle both numerical and categorical data, and perform well with large data. However, decision trees suﬀer from local optimal problems due to the use of heuristics; it may
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

18 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
create over-complex trees that do not generalize the data properly. Bayesian Classiﬁcation: Bayesian classiﬁers are statistical classiﬁers that are based on Bayes’ Theorem
to predict class membership probabilities. Naive Bayes, an instance of Bayesian classiﬁers, is well-known for its simplicity and low computational cost. It assumes the class conditional independence described as follows:
Given a data object x with d attributes x = (a1, a2, . . . , ad), x is assigned to the class having the highest posterior probability P (ci|x) computed as follows:

P (ci|x) = P (x|ci)P (ci) = P (ci) P (x|ci) (1)

P (x)

P (x)

P (ci) ∏d = P (x) P (ak|ci), ci ∈ {c1, c2, c3, . . . , cm}, (2)
k=1

where the values P (ak|ci) and P (ci) are estimated from the training data. Naive Bayes works in an incremental manner in that it simply increases the relevant counts, and makes predictions based on posterior probabilities whenever it receives a new data object.
Neural Networks: Neural networks consist of a set of input/output units where each connection has a modiﬁable weight. These weights are adjusted during the learning phase to predict the correct label of testing data. The central idea of neural network is to extract a nonlinear function by using linear combinations of the inputs as derived features. Therefore, the crucial problem of neural networks is to set the weights based on training data and desired output. Backpropagation algorithm is a common method of training neural networks that minimizes the mean squared error between the network’s prediction and the actual value. A multilayer feed-forward neural network (FFNN) that is based on the backpropagation algorithm has an input layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer. All weights and biases in the feed-forward neural network are initialized with small random numbers. Then, each training instance passes through the network and produces a predicted value. The error between the predicted value and its actual value is propagated backward by updating the weights and biases accordingly. Neural networks are robust to noise, produce high accurate results and can be parallelized easily. However, they suﬀer long training times and require a number of parameters that are best determined empirically, such as the initialized values of weights and biases, the number of hidden layers, and learning rate. Poor result interpretation is another disadvantage of neural networks; this is typically mitigated by network pruning techniques. Support Vector Machine (SVM): Support Vector Machines was ﬁrst introduced by Vapnik et al. in 1992 [Vapnik 1999]. It has become a principled and powerful classiﬁer outperforming most other systems in many applications. SVM ﬁnds the maximum marginal hyperplane (MMH) to best separate training data of diﬀerent classes. Training objects falling on the MMH are called support vectors. The problem of ﬁnding the MMH is known as a convex optimization and is solved by using Lagrangian formulation.

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 19
When data are linearly inseparable, SVM transforms data into a higher dimension, and ﬁnds a feasible linear separation. To reduce computational cost in the transformed space, kernel tricks are used to compute the equivalent dot products in the original input space without caring about the transforming function. SVM usually requires a long training time; however, it is highly accurate and less prone to over-ﬁtting.
k-Nearest-Neighbor Classiﬁer (k-NN): k-NN classiﬁer is a lazy learner that does not construct a general model. The k-NN classiﬁer does less work during the training step and does more work during the testing step. It indexes training data and simply assigns testing data to the dominant class of their k nearest neighbors. The distance measure between two data instances can be diverse: Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, Jaccard coeﬃcient, etc. Although this algorithm is simple and robust to noises, it requires much space to store all training data and is computationally expensive, as it needs to compute and compare distances from testing data to all others. Hence, it should be speeded up by applying eﬃcient storage structures and pre-sorting techniques. Liangxiao et al. introduced a good survey of improving k-NN [Liangxiao et al. 2007]. Ensemble Classiﬁers: Many classiﬁers have been proposed for inducing models from data. Each classiﬁer has its own strengths and weaknesses. In theory, there is no speciﬁc algorithm that works well for diﬀerent kinds of datasets. Developing a new algorithm that outperforms those existing classiﬁers in most kind of datasets is really hard or even infeasible. However, an easier way is integrating existing classiﬁers to create a more powerful classiﬁer; this is called ensemble classiﬁers. Typically, building an ensemble consists of two steps: (1) construct a set of diverse classiﬁers and (2) combine their classiﬁcation results. Various ensemble classiﬁers methods have been proposed, and they are principally diﬀerent from the above two steps. Here, we only present three basic ensemble methods: Bagging, Boosting and AdaBoost.
—Bagging: Bagging (bootstrap aggregating) was introduced by Breiman. In Bagging, each classiﬁer is trained on a diﬀerent bootstrap replicate of the training set. A bootstrap replication is generated by random sampling with replacement from the original dataset. Bagging uses voting method to combine its members’ classiﬁcation results.
—Boosting: Boosting aggregates many weak learners into a strong ensemble by ﬁltering the training data. Data objects that are misclassiﬁed or disagree on previous classiﬁers are treated as training objects for the next classiﬁer. The original boosting works as follows: —Select a random sample without replacement and train a learner C1. —Train weak learner C2 with ﬁltered examples, half of which are misclassiﬁed by C1. —Train weak learner C3 only with examples that C1 and C2 disagree on —Combine the predictions of C1, C2 and C3 by majority voting.
—AdaBoost: AdaBoost, short for Adaptive Boosting, is the most well-known and successful boosting algorithm in practice. It adapts to the errors of weak classiﬁers and set the weight for each classiﬁer instead of majority voting. Adaboost
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

20 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
re-weighs the samples in a manner that wrongly classiﬁed samples retain their weights while correctly classiﬁed samples relatively decrease their weights by
ϵ , where ϵ is the error rate of the previous classiﬁer. To combine classiﬁca-
1−ϵ tion results, Adaboost sets weights to classiﬁer members according to their error
ϵ rates, α = log . AdaBoost algorithm reduces error on the training set to
1−ϵ zero with a number of iterations. Currently, it is still unclear about AdaBoost’s capability to generalize testing data, which is not included in the training data.
4.2 Data Stream Classiﬁcation
Hoeﬀding Tree: Hoeﬀding tree is a decision tree classiﬁer for data streams [Domingos and Hulten 2000]. Traditional decision trees need to scan the training data many times to select the splitting attribute. However, this requirement is infeasible in the data stream environment. To overcome this limitation, the Hoeﬀding bound is used to choose an optimal splitting attribute within a suﬃcient amount of receiving data objects. Given N independent observations of a random variable r with range R and computed mean r, the Hoeﬀding bound guarantees that the true mean of r is at least r − ϵ with probability 1 − δ, where δ is a user-speciﬁed parameter.
√ R2ln(1/δ)
P (E[r] ≥ (r − ϵ)) ≥ 1 − δ, ϵ = 2N
Let G(Xi) be a heuristic measure to select a splitting attribute. After receiving N observations, Xa and Xb are the best and the second best splitting attribute. In case of Hoeﬀding tree, the variable r is now considered as r = ∆G = G(Xa)−G(Xb). If r = ∆G = G(Xa) − G(Xb) > ϵ, where ϵ is computed from the above equation, we say that this diﬀerence is larger than (r − ϵ) > 0 with conﬁdence 1 − δ. Then, the attribute Xa is selected to build the tree.
Hoeﬀding tree algorithm is an incremental algorithm, which satisﬁes the singlepass constraint of data stream mining. For each new arriving data, Hoeﬀding tree algorithm use Hoeﬀding bounds to check whether the best splitting attribute is conﬁdent enough to create the next level tree node.
Hoeﬀding tree algorithm has high accuracy and works well with large datasets. However, it is not able to handle concept drifts in data streams as no node can be changed once created. CVFDT [Hulten et al. 2001] is an extension of the Hoeﬀding tree to address concept drifts in data streams. CVFDT maintains suﬃcient statistics at every tree node to monitor the validity of its previous decisions. When data come, it continually updates the statistics stored in tree nodes. Using the sliding window, CVFDT removes the eﬀect of outdated data by decreasing the corresponding statistics at the tree nodes. It periodically scans the tree nodes to detect concept drifts. If concept drift appears, CVFDT concurrently grows alternative branches with the new best attribute and removes the old branches with alternative branches if it becomes less accurate.
Bayesian Belief Network: Seidl et al. proposed a novel index-based classiﬁer called Bayes tree [Seidl et al. 2009]. Adapted from the R*-tree, Bayes tree generates a hierarchical Gaussian-mixture tree to represent the entire dataset. Each tree node contains statistics of the data objects within, including a minimum bounding rectangle, the number of data objects, linear sum, and quadratic sum of all data
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 21

objects.

To solve a multi-labeled classiﬁcation problem, a single Bayes tree is constructed

for each class. For each testing data object x, the algorithm tries to ﬁnd a set of

preﬁx-closed nodes Ei, called frontier, in every Bayes tree. The probability that x

belongs to class ci is computed as follows:

∑ nes

P (ci|x) = (

g(x, µes , σes )) ∗ P (ci)/P (x),

n

es ∈Ei

where es is a tree node in the frontier set Ei; nes , µes and σes are respectively the number of data object, the center and the deviation of tree node es. Testing object x is labeled with the class having the maximum probability. Bayes tree is an anytime classiﬁer that can provide a decision after a very short initialization, and later provide more accurate decisions when more time is available by selecting the more precise frontier.
Bayes tree is later extended to the MC-tree [Kranen et al. 2010] by Kranen et al.. The MC-tree combines all classes in a multi-Gaussian tree and needs only one step to reﬁne all class models simultaneously rather than |C| steps in Bayes tree, where |C| is the number of classes. Moreover, MC-Tree optimizes tree construction by using multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) [de Leeuw 2005] to transform the data space. It is claimed to outperform Bayes tree with higher accuracy of up to 15%.
Neural Network: Leite et al. propose an evolving granular neural network (eGNN) supported by granule-based learning algorithms to classify data streams. There are two phases in eGNN. In the ﬁrst phase, eGNN use T-S neurons to construct information granules of incoming data. Then, the neural network is built on the information granules rather than the original data in the second phase. A granule associated with a class label is deﬁned by triangular membership functions, which are later evolved to accommodate new data. The weights are decreased by a decay constant; this process helps to reduce the degree of importance of outdated granules. Basically, eGNN uses class exemplars in the form of information granules to perform classiﬁcation tasks. When testing data comes, a max-neuron selects the best-ﬁt granules and assigns their labels as the prediction labels of the testing data. eGNN is able to tackle classiﬁcation problems in continuously changing environments. However, the requirement of long training time is still a cost that limits the ability of eGNN to work with a massive dataset. Therefore, only small datasets are used to evaluate the performance of eGNN in the experiment section of this paper. The authors later extend this work to a more general and eﬃcient semi-supervised approaches [Leite et al. 2010] to work with partially labeled dataset.
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) have shown its prominent performance in many machine learning problems with static datasets. However, it is very expensive to use SMVs in large scale application due to its time complexity O(N 3) and memory complexity O(N 2), where N is the number of data objects. To work with a very large dataset, Tsang et al. proposed the Core Vector Machine (CVM) algorithm that uses Minimum Enclosing Ball (MEB) to reduce its complexity [Tsang et al. 2007]. A MEB is a hyper-sphere that represents the set of data objects inside it. The algorithm ﬁrst ﬁnds a representative MEB set that is a good approximation of the original dataset. Then, the optimization problem of ﬁnding the maximum margin is directly performed on this MEB set.

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

22 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

Rai et al. propose StreamSVM [Rai et al. 2009], an extension of CVM with a

single scan, to work with data streams. In StreamSVM, a MEB has a ﬂexible radius

that is increased whenever a new training is added. The algorithm is competitive

by providing an approximation result to the optimal one. However, StreamSVM is

still unable to detect concept drifts in data streams.

k-Nearest-Neighbor Classiﬁer: On-Demand-Stream is a k-NN data stream

classiﬁer that extends the CluStream method [Aggarwal et al. 2006]. It inher-

its most of the good features in CluStream such as the micro-cluster structure,

the tilted-time window, and the online-oﬄine approach. A micro-cluster in On-

Demand-Stream is extended with a class label, and it only takes data objects with

the same class label. Its oﬄine classiﬁcation process starts to ﬁnd the best window

of data objects, called the best time horizon. These micro-clusters in the best time

horizon are extracted using the addition property of micro-clusters. On-Demand-

Stream perform 1-NN classiﬁcation by assigning a testing data object to the label

of the closest micro-clusters.

Inspired by M-tree [Ciaccia et al. 1997], Zhang et al. [Zhang et al. 2011] propose

a Lazy-tree structure to index micro clusters (which are called exemplars in the

paper). This helps to signiﬁcantly reduce k-NN’s classiﬁcation time from O(N ) to

O(log(N )), where N is the total number of exemplars in the Lazy-tree. The tree

consists of three main operations: search, insertion and deletion operations. The

insertion and deletion operations add new nodes and remove outdated nodes in a

way that guarantees that the tree is balanced. The search operation is used to

classify testing data. A branch-and-bound technique based on the triangle inequal-

ity ﬁlters unnecessary checking exemplars; therefore, it minimizes the number of

comparison and accelerates the searching operation.

Ensemble Classiﬁers: Bagging and Boosting have shown their superior through

extensive experiments on traditional dataset. Therefore, many researchers have

tried to adapt the methods to work on data streams.

- Online Bagging & Boosting: Oza et al. proposed the Online Bagging & Boost-

ing, which is one of the ﬁrst work of adapting traditional bagging and boosting [Oza

2005]. From a statistical view, each training data object appears k times in training

( ) ( )k (

)N −k

N1

1

datasets of classiﬁer members with the probability P (k) = k N 1 − N ,

where k is the size of training set and N is the size of dataset. On data streams,

we can assume that the number of data objects is unlimited, N → ∞. Therefore, the probability P (k) tends to a P oisson(1) distribution, where P oisson(1) =

exp(−1)/k!. Within this observation, Oza et al. proposed Online Bagging to assign each data object a weight according to P oisson(1) distribution, which is considered

as a replacement sampling method. In Online Boosting, the weights of coming data

objects and classiﬁer members are adjusted according to the error rates of classiﬁer

members at the current time.

- Weighted Ensemble Classiﬁers: With the observation that the expiration of

old data should rely on data distribution instead of their arrival time, Wang et al.

proposed an ensemble classiﬁer with weighting method for mining concept-drifting

in data streams [Wang et al. 2003]. The algorithm constructs and maintains a ﬁx k

number of classiﬁers, which can be C4.5, RIPPER, or naive Bayesian. Processing

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 23
in a batch-mode manner, it use each new chunk of coming data objects to train a new classiﬁer. Then, the ensemble is formed by selecting the k most accurate classiﬁers, and the weight of each classiﬁer is set according to its accuracy. This method is stated to be better than a single data stream classiﬁer, such as VFDT, CVFDT. However, it is quite sensitive to the chunk size and the number of classiﬁer members k.
In real applications, data stream may contain noise where data instance may be mislabeled or have erroneous values. Zhang et al. proposed an aggregated ensemble algorithm to tackle the problem of learning from noisy data stream [Zhang et al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2011]. This approach is a combination of horizontal and vertical ensemble frameworks. The horizontal framework builds a diﬀerent classiﬁer on each data chunk, while the vertical framework builds diﬀerent classiﬁers on the up-todate data chunk with diﬀerent learning algorithms. The horizontal framework is robust to noise and can reuse historical information; however, it is unsuitable with sudden drifts, where the concepts of data stream change dramatically. On the other hand, the vertical frame work can produce good results even in case of sudden drifts; nevertheless, it is sensitive to noise. Building classiﬁers on diﬀerent data chunks using diﬀerent learning algorithms, the aggregated ensemble constitutes a Classiﬁer Matrix. The average weighting method is used on this matrix to predict the label for testing data. The author theoretically proved that the aggregate ensemble has less or equal mean squared error of the vertical and horizontal frameworks in average. However, this framework suﬀers high time complexity.
Nguyen et al. [Nguyen et al. 2012] addressed the problem of learning from highdimensional data streams, where only a small subset of data features are important for learning process. Moreover, in this context, the deﬁnition of relevant features is temporary and limited to a certain period of time. Informative features may become irrelevant afterward, and previously insigniﬁcant features may become important features. Proposing a deﬁnition of feature drifts, i.e., a change in the set of important features, the authors combined this concept with a weighted ensemble classiﬁer to tackle this problem. A multivariate feature selection method [Lei and Huan 2003] is adapted with a sliding window technique to detect feature drifts. Then, an ensemble learner consists of selected online learners is constructed with an optimal weighting method. When a gradual drift occurs, classiﬁer members of the ensemble are updated and theirs weights are also adjusted according to their error rates. When a feature drift occurs, the ensemble replaces an old-fashioned learner with a updated classiﬁer, which is trained with a new set of important features. Experiment results show that the algorithm is eﬀective and eﬃcient with high-dimensional data streams.
- Adapted One-vs-All Decision Trees (OVA) [Sattar et al. 2009]: OVA is a recent ensemble method for data streams. It learns k binary CVFDT classiﬁers, and each classiﬁer is trained to classify instances between a speciﬁed class and all remaining classes. To classify a new data object, each classiﬁer is run and the one with the highest conﬁdence is returned. The conﬁdent of the classiﬁcation is set as the proportion of the dominant class at the leaf where the testing object has reached. To archive a high accuracy, OVA aims to construct an ensemble of CVFDT classiﬁers with a low error correlation and a high diversity. Moreover, OVA quickly adapts to
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

24 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
concept drifts as it only needs to update two component classiﬁers related to the evolving class, and can work well with imbalance data streams.
- Meta-knowledge Ensemble [Zhang et al. 2011]: The high complexity of ensemble learning limits it to be applicable to many time-critical data stream applications in the real world. Zhang et al. proposed a meta-knowledge ensemble algorithm that selects the best suit classiﬁer for testing data. An Ensemble-tree (E-tree) is constructed to organize base classiﬁers, each of which occupies a weight and a closed space in the whole data space. Similar to R-tree [Guttman 1984], the E-tree has three key operations, including search, insertion and deletion operation. Hence, it is height-balanced and guarantees a logarithmic time complexity for prediction. The insert operation is used to integrate a new classiﬁer into the ensemble. When the number of classiﬁers in a node exceeds a predeﬁned value, the node is split into two nodes with a principle that the covering area of the two nodes should be minimized. The deletion operation removes outdated classiﬁer when E-tree reaches its capacity, the tree may need to be re-organize to guarantee its balance. The search operation is used to classify a testing instance x. Classiﬁers whose close space contains x are invoked, a weighted voting method is applied to decide a class label for x.
4.3 Overall analysis
After presenting many data stream classiﬁers, we introduce an overall analysis to summarize all related issues and give readers a broader view of data stream classiﬁcation. Figure 4 shows the relationship between traditional and data stream classiﬁers. Traditional classiﬁers are on the left; data stream classiﬁers are on the right. To categorize data stream classiﬁer, the two schemata, computational approaches and time windows, are in the middle.
Similarly, we observe that data stream classiﬁers are inherited from traditional classiﬁers and apply diﬀerent computational approaches and time windows. For example, VFDT is an extension of the decision trees for data streams. VFDT uses Hoeﬀding bound to create a tree node when having a suﬃcient amount of data. It follows the incremental learning approach and land-mark window. CVFDT is an enhanced version of VFDT that can adapt to concept-drift by constructing alternative trees. Bayes tree is an extension of Bayesian classiﬁer with the twophase learning approach and land-mark window. MC-Tree improves the Bayes tree with multi-label nodes. eGNN is a neural network algorithm that designed to work for data streams. CVM, derived from SVM classiﬁer, follows the two-phase learning approach and fading window. StreamSVM extends CVM by making the radius of minimum enclosing balls ﬂexible. On-Demand, an extension of k-NN classiﬁer, applies the two-phase learning approach and tilted-time window. LazyTree is another improved version of k-NN classiﬁer with the two-phase learning approach and sliding window. Many ensemble classiﬁers are designed to work for data streams. Online Bagging & Boosting are extensions of traditional Bagging & Boosting with incremental learning approach and sliding window. There are many weighted ensemble classiﬁers with diﬀerent weighting strategies. For example, aggregated ensemble uses average weighting method (voting); while HEFT-Stream, WCE, OVA, and Ensemble-tree apply weighting method based on the accuracy of classiﬁer members. They follow the incremental learning approach, and can be loosely considered of applying sliding window as they typically remove the least
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 25

Computational Approaches A Incremental learning B Two-phase learning

Time windows 1 Landmark window 2 Sliding window 3 Fading window 4 Tilted-time window

Decision Tree

A

1

VFDT

CVFDT

Bayesian

B

Classification

1

Bayes-tree

MC-tree

Hoeffding bound
Alternative trees R*-Tree + mixture Gaussian model
Multi-label node + MDS

Neural Network
SVM

A 3 eGNN Evolving layer & Aggregation layer

Minimum

B

3

CVM

enclosing ball

StreamSVM

Flexible radius

B Lazy Learner B

4

On-Demand

2

Lazy-Tree

E-Tree + exemplars

Ensemble

Bagging

A

Boosting

A

Weighted Ensemble

A

Ensemble

2

Online Bagging

2

Online Boosting

HEFT-Stream

WCE

2

OVA

Aggregated Ensemble

Ensemble-tree

Dynamic Feature Selection

Traditional Classification

Data Stream Classification

Fig. 4. The relationships between traditional classiﬁcation methods and stream classiﬁcation methods.

accurate clariﬁer member. Moreover, we evaluate capabilities of data stream classiﬁers into the Table IV.
Although many classiﬁers have been proposed, they are typically unable to satisfy all constraints of data stream mining at the same time, which are discussed in Section 2. Similarly, we propose two levels of concept-drift constraint, concept-drift adaptation and concept-drift classiﬁcation. We also assess whether these classiﬁers
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

26 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

Bounded Memory Single-pass Real-time Response Concept-drift Adaptation Concept-drift Classiﬁcation High-dimensional Data

Algorithm

√√√

√

VFDT [Domingos and Hulten 2000] √ √ √ √ √

CVFDT [Hulten et al. 2001]

√√√√

Bayes tree [Seidl et al. 2009]

√√√√

MC-tree [Kranen et al. 2010]

√√

√

eGNN [Leite et al. 2009]

√√

√

CVM [Tsang et al. 2007]

√√

√

StreamSVM [Rai et al. 2009]

√√√√

On-Demand [Aggarwal et al. 2006]

√√√√

Lazy-Tree [Zhang et al. 2011]

√√√

Online Bagging & Boosting [Oza 2005] √ √ √ √ √

WCE [Wang et al. 2003]

√√√√

√

OVA [Sattar et al. 2009]

√√√√√√

HEFT-Stream [Nguyen et al. 2012]

√√√√

Aggregated Ensemble [Zhang et al. 2011] √ √ √ √ √

Ensemble-tree [Zhang et al. 2011]

Table IV. Capabilities of data stream classiﬁcation algorithms.
can work for high-dimensional data streams. We observe that all classiﬁers satisfy the bounded-memory and single pass constraints. eGNN, CVM, and StreamSVM cannot response in a real-time manner, as they require much time for training process. HEFT-Stream can distinguish two kinds of concept-drifts (gradual drifts and feature drifts), and adapts properly to them. VFDT, CVFDT, WCE, OVA, and Ensemble-tree can work for high-dimensional data streams, as they deploy the decision tree as their primitive classiﬁers.
When a classiﬁer follows a computational approach and time-window, it will have some speciﬁc tradeoﬀs, which is discussed in Section 2. Moreover, traditional and data stream classiﬁers also have common advantages and limitations in Table V. For example, decision trees are easy to understand, robust to noise, eﬃcient, and can remove redundant attributes; however, it suﬀers an over-ﬁtting problem when the tree has many levels and the classiﬁcation rules become diﬃcult to interpret. The lazy-learner can be implemented easily, but it consumes much memory and is susceptible to high-dimensional data streams. Ensemble is highly accurate and easy to implement; however, it is mostly based on heuristics and lacks of solid theory.

5. FUTURE RESEARCH Although signiﬁcant data stream research has been performed for more than a decade, there are still many research issues that need to be further explored. The
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 27

Algorithm Decision Tree

Bayesian siﬁer Neural work

ClasNet-

SVM

Lazy Learner: k-NN
Ensemble

Advantages Easy to understand Robust to noises Low computational cost, even for very large training datasets Can deal with redundant attributes. Simple, eﬃcient, eﬀective and robust to noisy data Well-generalizing capability. Can solve dynamic or non-linear problem. Provide a unique solution. Can solve non-linear problem with implicit kernel. Work well even when training sample are bias. Easy to implement.
High accuracy. Easy to implement.

Limitations Suﬀer an over-ﬁtting problem when the tree has many levels and the rules become diﬃcult to comprehend.
Independence assumption is often violated in the real world. Inability to interpret the learned model (black-box). High complexity. Depend on the choice of the kernel. High complexity. Diﬃcult to design multi-class SVM classiﬁers.
Large storage requirements. High complexity. Highly susceptible to highdimensional data. Based on heuristics and lack of solid theory.

Table V. Advantages and limitations of classiﬁcation algorithms

most important topics are described follow:
5.1 Dynamic Feature Selection
In high-dimensional dataset, not all data attributes (features) are important to the learning process. Figure 5(a) shows three common types of features: (i) irrelevant features, (ii) relevant but redundant features, and (iii) relevant and non-redundant features. The critical task of dimension reduction techniques is to extract the set of relevant and non-redundant features so that the learning process is more meaningful and faster. Moreover, to reduce the number of features, an algorithm may select a subset of the full feature space (called feature selection), or derive a new feature by combining existing features (called feature extraction). Feature selection is preferable to feature extraction, as it preserves the meaning of selected features while the latter usually creates hard-to-understand features. Moreover, feature selection has a limited feature search space |2d|, where d is the number of features. Feature extraction has unlimited search space; however, its performance is usually better than feature selection. Figure 5(b) illustrates some approaches for each type of dimension reduction algorithms. For example, feature selection includes projected, subspace, and hybrid approaches. Feature extraction consists of PCA-based, fractal-based, and random sampling approaches [Kriegel et al. 2009].
In the literature, feature selection techniques can be classiﬁed into three categories: ﬁlter, wrapper and embedded models [Liu and Yu 2005]. The ﬁlter model applies an independent measure to evaluate a feature subset; thus, it only relies on the general characteristics of data. The wrapper model runs together with a learning algorithm and uses its performance to evaluate a feature subset. A hybrid
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

28 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
Feature Space

Dimension Reduction

(II)

(III)

Feature Selection

Feature Extraction

Relevant

Irrelevant

(I)

Projected Subspace Hybrid PCA-based Fractal-based Random

sampling

Redundant

Non-redundant

(a) Types of Feature

(b) Types of Dimension Reduction Algorithms

Fig. 5. Overview of Feature Selection

Approach Filter
Wrapper
Hybrid (Filter+Wrapper)

Advantages Fast Scalable Independce of the classiﬁer Interact with the classiﬁer Can ﬁnd the most “useful” features toward the classiﬁer Interact with the classiﬁer Better computational complexity than wrapper methods Are prone to over-ﬁtting

Limitations Ignores interaction with the classiﬁer
High computational cost Risk of overﬁtting Classiﬁer dependent selection Classiﬁer dependent selection

Table VI. Advantages and limitations of feature selection models.

model takes advantage of the above two models. Advantages and limitations of the three models are elaborated in Table VI. Furthermore, the importance of a feature evolves in data streams and is restricted to a certain period of time. Features that are previously considered as informative may become irrelevant, and vice-versa, those rejected features may become important features in the future. Thus, dynamic feature selection techniques are required to monitor the evolution of features.

After investigating many clustering and classiﬁcation algorithms, we observe that only a few algorithms work with high-dimensional data streams, and, they have many limitations. For clustering, HPStream [Aggarwal et al. 2004] applies the projected approach, and only removes irrelevant features but no redundant features. It requires a predeﬁned value of the average dimensional degree, and is just suitable for spherical-shape cluster. Similarly, IncPreDeCon [Kriegel et al. 2011] only takes out irrelevant features and suﬀers from high complexity. For classiﬁcation, some classiﬁers work with high-dimensional data streams as they are simply derived from or deployed decision tree as primitive classiﬁers [Domingos and Hulten 2000; Hulten et al. 2001; Wang et al. 2003; Sattar et al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2011]. In this scenario, they are considered to be deploying a ﬁlter model that uses decision tree’s
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 29
informative measures (e.g., information gain) to select relevant features. Hence, these algorithms strictly use decision tree as primitive classiﬁers, and are not able to remove redundant features. HEFT-Stream [Nguyen et al. 2012] is the only ensemble classiﬁer that removes both irrelevant and redundant features, and that works with any type of classiﬁer. However, HEFT-Stream still uses the ﬁlter model, which is independent of classiﬁer members. Therefore, the problem of dynamic feature selection in data streams is open and requires further exploration. A dimension reduction technique that follows the hybrid model, captures features’ evolution dynamically, and removes both irrelevant and redundant features is much expected.
5.2 Incorporating Temporal Order
Spiliopoulou et al. [Spiliopoulou et al. 2006] proposed the MONIC algorithm to model and detect changes in clusters. Matching clusters by checking their overlaps, they deﬁned two types of cluster transitions: internal transitions (e.g., cluster shrinks, cluster expands, cluster becomes compacter or diﬀuser, cluster shifts) and external transitions (e.g., cluster survives, cluster is split into many clusters, cluster is merged with other cluster, cluster disappears, and cluster emerges). MONIC has the advantage of independence from any clustering algorithm; however, it is unsuitable for data streams. It requires time to post-process clustering results; thus, cannot show relationships among clusters in a real-time manner.
C-TREND [Adomavicius and Bockstedt 2008] constructs a temporal cluster graph to capture temporal order among clusters. In this graph, each node represents for a cluster and is labeled with the size of the cluster. Edges connect adjacent node and are labeled with a distance value (similarity) between two nodes.Althought C-TREND is able to visualize and detect trends in multi-attribute temporal data, it suﬀers from many limitations. First, C-TREND is not suitable for data streams as it requires a predeﬁned number of clusters. C-TREND is also computationally expensive as it deploys hierarchical clustering and constructs a dendrogram as a preprocessing step. Moreover, it only considers transitions among clusters while other internal cluster transition are ignored.
TRACDS [Hahsler and Dunham 2011] takes advantage of both MONIC and C-TREND. It presents a technique that is independent of clustering algorithms and that records transitions among clusters into a transition-count matrix that represents a Markov Chain directed graph. Unlike MONIC that performs postprocess clustering results to detect cluster transitions, TRACDS constructs the transition-count matrix incrementally whenever each data instance arrives and is assigned to a speciﬁed cluster. Therefore, TRACDS only needs a very light-weight interface, and is able to work for data streams.
The above research work tracks evolution of clusters; however, they typically ignore the historical clustering that is important to producing better clustering results. Evolutionary clustering that considers this research issue has attracted much research work recently. It focuses on processing time-stamp data to produce a sequence of clustering, each of which is a time-step of the system. Evolutionary clustering should optimize the trade-oﬀ between preserving the faithfulness of current data as much as possible, while preventing dramatic shifts from historical clustering to the next step. Chakrabarti et al. [Chakrabarti et al. 2006] ﬁrst introduced the problem and proposed a framework for evolutionary clustering by
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

30 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.

embedding a smoothing parameter to penalize the important of historical clusters,

as follows:

t=1 ∑T sq(Ct, Mt) − cp. t=2 ∑T hc(Ct−1, Ct),

where sq(Ct, Mt) is a snapshot quality of the clustering Ct at time t with respect to a relationship matrix Mt, hc(Ct−1, Ct) is a history cost between Ct and Ct−1, and cp is the smoothing parameter. Most evolutionary clusterings diﬀer from snapshot quality and history cost functions. The authors deployed agglomerative hierarchical clustering and k-means as examples of the framework. In hierarchical clustering, snapshot quality is the quality of all merges performed to create Ct; history cost is the distance between two trees. In k-means clustering, snapshot quality is the sum of distance between each data instance and its center; history cost is the sum of distance between each pairing clusters between time t and t − 1. Extending this idea, Chi et al. proposed two frameworks for evolutionary spectral clustering, called Preserving Cluster Quality (PCQ) and Preserving Cluster Membership (PCM) [Chi et al. 2007; 2009]. PCQ penalizes clustering results that disagree with past similarities, while PCM penalizes clustering results that disagree with past clustering results.
Visualizing clusters over time has also attracted much research in both data stream mining and evolutionary clustering. OPTICS-Stream [Tasoulis et al. 2007] is one of the ﬁrst work that attempts to visualize the temporal order of clusters. Inheriting the OPTICS algorithm [Ankerst et al. 1999], OPTICS-Stream uses microcluster structure to build a synopsis of data streams, and further orders reachabilitydistance among micro-clusters. It produces a 3-D reachability plot that can be used to visualize the clustering structure and structure changes in data streams. However, this plot fails to provide a clear view of borders among clusters and cannot extract external transitions clusters, such as splitting or merging clusters.
Lin et al. [Lin et al. 2010] proposed ContexTour framework for visualizing and exploring multiple dimensions of community activities in social networks. It includes users, community-generated content, relevant topic, as well as their evolutions. The framework has two components, Dynamic Relational Clustering (DRC) and Dynamic Network Contour-map (DNC). The DRC is an evolutionary clustering method that eﬃciently tracks and ﬁnds smoothly evolving soft clusters that best ﬁt the community evolution. The DNC visualizes the results of DRC. It ﬁrst selects the most important entities that have high conditional probability given a cluster; then the cosine similarity between those entities is computed. The contour-map layout is constructed to depict the density distribution of all entities. The DBLP dataset is examined to evaluate the performance of ContexTour.
To better understand evolving topics in text data, Cui et al. [Cui et al. 2011] proposed TextFlow, an interactive visual analysis tool for analyzing evolution patterns from multiple topics. The core component of TextFlow is a three-level Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) whose ﬁrst-level corresponds to the topic ﬂow, the second layer encodes keyword bundles (critical events), and the third level represents keyword thread. First, text documents are clustered so that topics represented by document clusters and their connections are extracted. The Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes [Teh et al. 2006] is used to trace spitting/merging events between topics. These critical events are likely to involve intense keyword changes as a topic is

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 31
summarized by keywords. Acknowledging the limitation of stack-based graph [Dork et al. 2010] that cannot well present topic merging and splitting, TextFlow applies a river-ﬂow-based visualization that help users understand and analyze the evolution topics easily. The publication and Bing news datasets are used to demonstrate this framework.
Evolutionary clustering and data stream clustering have a close relationship. Working with large amounts of high rate data, data stream clustering much focuses on single-pass and scalability issues. While evolutionary clustering aims to obtain cluster that evolve smoothly over time, most evolutionary clusterings are spectral clustering algorithms that require matrix and graph processing operations; thus, they are usually computationally expensive. Therefore, developing an evolutionary clustering for data stream remains a challenges. Moreover, any clustering algorithm should support user-friendly visualization so that users may easily explore transitions among clusters and understand the major reasons that trigger these evolutionary transitions.
5.3 Other Research Directions
—Concept drift is one of the basic challenges in data stream mining. As mentioned in Section 2.1, a concept drift can be deﬁned as a tuple of prior probabilities P (ci) and class-conditional probabilities P (xt|ci). By monitoring these probabilities, researchers try to categorize diﬀerent types of concept drifts, such as, gradual drifts, sudden drifts, incremental drifts, reoccurring drifts [Minku et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2008; Zliobaite 2010]. Although many adaptive learners have been proposed to deal with concept drifts, none of them is able to detect all types of concept drifts. This limitation leads us to the following research questions: How can we measure the degree of concept drifts so that it is possible to detect all kinds of concept drifts? Also, how can a classiﬁer properly adapt to diﬀerent types of concept-drifts?
—Cloud computing has recently become a highly disruptive technology. It aims to provide computation, data access, software and storage services that are available on demand. Thus, cloud computing is expected to facilitate data stream mining soon. However, the privacy issue is one of the key concerns of cloud computing. Although cryptography may solve the privacy preservation problem, its high complexity is still a cost. Thus, deploying data stream mining on cloud computing is still a challenge and requires more research eﬀorts.
—Multiple Data Streams (MDS) has recently been used in many applications where many local data sources are located at diﬀerent locations and have diﬀerent protocols such as sampling rates, data formats, data processing models, distribution time and so on. Therefore, synchronizing and merging data is more signiﬁcant in MDS mining. Also, the relationships among data sources is still unclear. Currently, MDS mining is still in its infancy stage with lack of formal deﬁnitions and thorough surveys.
6. CONCLUSIONS
Recently, data streams have become popular in many real-life applications where intensive data can be generated frequently. Research in data stream mining has
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

32 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
led to a large variety of clustering and classiﬁcation algorithms in the past decade. However, each algorithm has its own advantages and limitations, and is not suitable for all kinds of problems and arbitrary datasets. Given a research problem with a speciﬁed domain, choosing an appropriate algorithm becomes a critical task as this requires background knowledge of the basic principles and systematic approaches in the research ﬁeld. This survey aims to provide a coherent analysis of the stateof-the-art data stream clustering and classiﬁcation algorithms.
First, we outline the diﬀerence between traditional data mining and data stream mining. We identify some constraints and propose a general model for data stream mining. Various computational approaches and time windows together with their tradeoﬀs are presented.
Then, we discuss in detail various state-of-the-art algorithms in both traditional and data stream clustering in Section 3. Their relationships are visualized in Figure 3, which gives readers an intuitive understanding on how data stream clustering is inherited from traditional clustering. Furthermore, we examine their capabilities on satisfying constraints of data stream mining in Table II. Advantages and limitations of clustering categories are also investigated in Table III. Similarly, critical analysis is applied to data stream classiﬁcation in Section 4. The relationship between traditional and data stream classiﬁer is illustrated in Figure 4. Their capabilities are evaluated in Table IV, and the tradeoﬀs of classiﬁer categories are presented in Table V.
Finally, we explore future research directions. Dynamic feature selection should attract more attention in high-dimensional data streams such as biological or text applications. Moreover, incorporating temporal order gives much help on tracking evolutions on data stream mining. It should come together with a visualization toolkit so that users can easily explore and understand the evolutions. Other research directions, e.g., measuring the degree of concept-drifts, deploying data streaming on cloud computing, and multiple data stream are interesting areas for future research.
REFERENCES
Adomavicius, G. and Bockstedt, J. 2008. C-trend: Temporal cluster graphs for identifying and visualizing trends in multiattribute transactional data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 721–735.
Aggarwal, C. C. 2009. Data streams: An overview and scientiﬁc applications. In Scientiﬁc Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, M. M. Gaber, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 377–397.
Aggarwal, C. C., Han, J., Wang, J., and Yu, P. S. 2003. A framework for clustering evolving data streams. In Proceedings of the 29th international conference on Very large data bases. Vol. 29. VLDB Endowment, 81–92.
Aggarwal, C. C., Han, J., Wang, J., and Yu, P. S. 2004. A framework for projected clustering of high dimensional data streams. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth international conference on Very large data bases - Volume 30. VLDB Endowment, Toronto, Canada, 852–863.
Aggarwal, C. C., Han, J., Wang, J., and Yu, P. S. 2006. A framework for on-demand classiﬁcation of evolving data streams. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 18, 5, 577–589.
Alahakoon, D., Halgamuge, S. K., and Srinivasan, B. 2000. Dynamic self-organizing maps with controlled growth for knowledge discovery. Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on 11, 3, 601–614.
Alexander, H., Er, H., and Daniel, A. K. 1998. An eﬃcient approach to clustering in large
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 33
multimedia databases with noise. In Proceeding of the 1998 ntenational Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD98). New York, 58–65. Ankerst, M., Breunig, M. M., Kriegel, H.-P., and Sander, J. 1999. Optics: ordering points to identify the clustering structure. In SIGMOD ’99 Proceedings of the 1999 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data. Vol. 28. ACM, 49–60. Bifet, A. 2010. Adaptive Stream Mining: Pattern Learning and Mining from Evolving Data Streams. Proceeding of the 2010 conference on Adaptive Stream Mining: Pattern Learning and Mining from Evolving Data Streams. IOS Press. Bohm, C., Kailing, K., Kriegel, H.-P., and Kroger, P. 2004. Density connected clustering with local subspace preferences. In Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. IEEE Computer Society, 27–34. Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Stone, C., and Olshen, R. A. 1984. Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees. Chapman and Hall/CRC. Cao, F., Ester, M., Qian, W., and Zhou, A. 2006. Density-based clustering over an evolving data stream with noise. In Proceedings of the 2006 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining. 328–339. Chakrabarti, D., Kumar, R., and Tomkins, A. 2006. Evolutionary clustering. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 554–560. Chen, Y. and Tu, L. 2007. Density-based clustering for real-time stream data. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, San Jose, California, USA, 133–142. Chi, Y., Song, X., Zhou, D., Hino, K., and Tseng, B. 2007. Evolutionary spectral clustering by incorporating temporal smoothness. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 153–162. Chi, Y., Song, X., Zhou, D., Hino, K., and Tseng, B. 2009. On evolutionary spectral clustering. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 3, 4, 1–30. Chien, S. and Immorlica, N. 2005. Semantic similarity between search engine queries using temporal correlation. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on World Wide Web. ACM, Chiba, Japan, 2–11. Chow, T. W. S. and Sitao, W. 2004. An online cellular probabilistic self-organizing map for static and dynamic data sets. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 51, 4, 732–747. Chris, G., Jiaweihan, Y., Jianpei, Z., Xifeng Yan, Y., and Philip, S. Y. 2003. Mining frequent patterns in data streams at multiple time granularities. Next generation data mining 212, 191– 212. Ciaccia, P., Patella, M., and Zezula, P. 1997. M-tree: An eﬃcient access method for similarity search in metric spaces. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 426–435. Cui, W., Liu, S., Tan, L., Shi, C., Song, Y., Gao, Z., Qu, H., and Tong, X. 2011. Textﬂow: Towards better understanding of evolving topics in text. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 17, 12, 2412–2421. Dang, X., Lee, V., Ng, W., Ciptadi, A., and Ong, K. 2009. An em-based algorithm for clustering data streams in sliding windows. In Database Systems for Advanced Applications. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5463. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 230–235. de Leeuw, J. 2005. Applications of convex analysis to multidimensional scaling. In Recent Developments in Statistics, J. Barra, F. Brodeau, G. Romier, and B. V. Cutsem, Eds. North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 133–146. Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the em algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 39, 1, 1–38. Domingos, P. and Hulten, G. 2000. Mining high-speed data streams. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, Boston, Massachusetts, United States, 71–80.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

34 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
Dork, M., Gruen, D., Williamson, C., and Carpendale, S. 2010. A visual backchannel for large-scale events. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 16, 6, 1129– 1138.
Gaber, M. M., Zaslavsky, A., and Krishnaswamy, S. 2005. Mining data streams: a review. ACM Sigmod Record 34, 2, 18–26.
Gama, J. and Gaber, M. M. 2007. Learning from Data Streams – Processing Techniques in Sensor Networks. Springer.
Gama, J. and Rodrigues, P. 2009. An overview on mining data streams. In Foundations of Computational, IntelligenceVolume 6, A. Abraham, A.-E. Hassanien, A. d. L. F. d. Carvalho, and V. Snel, Eds. Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol. 206. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 29–45.
Guha, S., Kim, C., and Shim, K. 2004. Xwave: optimal and approximate extended wavelets. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth international conference on Very large data bases - Volume 30. VLDB Endowment, Toronto, Canada, 288–299.
Guha, S., Mishra, N., Motwani, R., and O’Callaghan, L. 2000. Clustering data streams. In Foundations of Computer Science, 2000. Proceedings. 41st Annual Symposium on. 359–366.
Guha, S., Rastogi, R., and Shim, K. 1998. Cure: an eﬃcient clustering algorithm for large databases. In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data. ACM, Seattle, Washington, United States, 73–84.
Guha, S., Rastogi, R., and Shim, K. 1999. Rock: A robust clustering algorithm for categorical attributes. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Data Engineering. IEEE Computer Society, 512.
Guttman, A. 1984. R-trees: a dynamic index structure for spatial searching. In Proceedings of the 1984 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data. 47–57.
Hahsler, M. and Dunham, M. 2011. Temporal structure learning for clustering massive data streams in real-time. In SIAM Conference on Data Mining (SDM11). SIAM, Mesa, Arizona, 664–675.
Han, J. 2005. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
Hulten, G., Spencer, L., and Domingos, P. 2001. Mining time-changing data streams. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, San Francisco, California, 97–106.
Karypis, G., Eui-Hong, H., and Kumar, V. 1999. Chameleon: hierarchical clustering using dynamic modeling. Computer 32, 8, 68–75.
Kaufman, L. and Rousseeuw, P. 1990. Finding groups in data: an introduction to cluster analysis. Vol. 39. Wiley Online Library.
Kelly, M. G., Hand, D. J., and Adams, N. M. 1999. The impact of changing populations on classiﬁer performance. In Proceedings of the ﬁfth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, San Diego, California, United States, 367–371.
Kranen, P., Gnnemann, S., Fries, S., and Seidl, T. 2010. Mc-tree: Improving bayesian anytime classiﬁcation. In Scientiﬁc and Statistical Database Management, M. Gertz and B. Ludscher, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6187. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 252–269.
Kriegel, H.-P., Krger, P., Ntoutsi, I., and Zimek, A. 2011. Density based subspace clustering over dynamic data. In Scientiﬁc and Statistical Database Management, J. Bayard Cushing, J. French, and S. Bowers, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6809. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 387–404.
Kriegel, H.-P., Kroger, P., and Zimek, A. 2009. Clustering high-dimensional data: A survey on subspace clustering, pattern-based clustering, and correlation clustering. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data 3, 1, 1–58.
Last, M. 2002. Online classiﬁcation of nonstationary data streams. Intelligent Data Analysis 6, 2, 129–147.
Lei, Y. and Huan, L. 2003. Feature selection for high-dimensional data: A fast correlation-based ﬁlter solution. In The 20th ICML. 856–863.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 35
Leite, D., Costa, P., and Gomide, F. 2010. Evolving granular neural network for semi-supervised data stream classiﬁcation. In The 2010 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 1–8.
Leite, D. F., Costa, P., and Gomide, F. 2009. Evolving granular classiﬁcation neural networks. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2009. IJCNN 2009. 1736–1743.
Lhr, S. and Lazarescu, M. 2009. Incremental clustering of dynamic data streams using connectivity based representative points. Data and Knowledge Engineering 68, 1, 1–27.
Liangxiao, J., Zhihua, C., Dianhong, W., and Siwei, J. 2007. Survey of improving k-nearestneighbor for classiﬁcation. In Fourth International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery, 2007. FSKD 2007. Vol. 1. 679–683.
Lin, Y., Sun, J., Cao, N., and Liu, S. 2010. Contextour: Contextual contour visual analysis on dynamic multi-relational clustering. In In Proceedings of 2010 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 2010). Columbus, Ohio, USA, 418–429.
Liu, H. and Yu, L. 2005. Toward integrating feature selection algorithms for classiﬁcation and clustering. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 17, 4, 491–502.
Martin, E., Hans-Peter, K., Jrg, S., and Xiaowei, X. 1996. A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data mining. AAAI Press, 226–231.
Minku, L. L., White, A. P., and Xin, Y. 2010. The impact of diversity on online ensemble learning in the presence of concept drift. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 22, 5, 730–742.
Muthukrishnan, S. M. 2003. Data Streams: Algorithms and Applications. Now Publishers Inc. Ng, R. T. and Han, J. 2002. Clarans: a method for clustering objects for spatial data mining.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 14, 5, 1003–1016. Nguyen, H.-L., Ng, W.-K., and Woon, Y.-K. 2012. Heterogeneous ensemble for feature drifts in
data streams. In The 16th Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Springer, Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia. O’Callaghan, L., Mishra, N., Meyerson, A., Guha, S., and Motwani, R. 2002. Streamingdata algorithms for high-quality clustering. In Data Engineering, 2002. Proceedings. 18th International Conference on. 685–694. Oza, N. C. 2005. Online bagging and boosting. In 2005 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Vol. 3. IEEE, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2340–2345. Park, N. H. and Lee, W. S. 2004. Statistical grid-based clustering over data streams. ACM SIGMOD Record 33, 1, 32–37. Park, N. H. and Lee, W. S. 2007. Cell trees: An adaptive synopsis structure for clustering multi-dimensional on-line data streams. Data and Knowledge Engineering 63, 2, 528–549. Quinlan, J. R. 1986. Induction of decision trees. Machine Learning 1, 1, 81–106. Quinlan, R. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning (Morgan Kaufmann Series in Machine Learning). Morgan Kaufmann. Rai, P., Daum, H., and Venkatasubramanian, S. 2009. Streamed learning: one-pass svms. In Proceedings of the 21st international jont conference on Artiﬁcal intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., Pasadena, California, USA, 1211–1216. Sattar, H., Ying, Y., Zahra, M., and Mohammadreza, K. 2009. Adapted one-vs-all decision trees for data stream classiﬁcation. In IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. Vol. 21. 624 – 637. Seidl, T., Assent, I., Kranen, P., Krieger, R., and Herrmann, J. 2009. Indexing density models for incremental learning and anytime classiﬁcation on data streams. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Extending Database Technology: Advances in Database Technology. ACM, Saint Petersburg, Russia, 311–322. Sheikholeslami, G., Chatterjee, S., and Zhang, A. 2000. Wavecluster: a wavelet-based clustering approach for spatial data in very large databases. The VLDB Journal 8, 3-4, 289–304. Smith, T. and Alahakoon, D. 2009. Growing self-organizing map for online continuous clustering. In Foundations of Computational Intelligence Volume 4, A. Abraham, A.-E. Hassanien,
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

36 · Hai-Long Nguyen et al.
and A. de Carvalho, Eds. Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol. 204. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 49–83.
Sow, D., Biem, A., Blount, M., Ebling, M., and Verscheure, O. 2010. Body sensor data processing using stream computing. In Proceedings of the international conference on Multimedia information retrieval. ACM, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, 449–458.
Spiliopoulou, M., Ntoutsi, I., Theodoridis, Y., and Schult, R. 2006. Monic: modeling and monitoring cluster transitions. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 706–711.
Street, W. N. and Kim, Y. 2001. A streaming ensemble algorithm (sea) for large-scale classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, San Francisco, California, 377–382.
Tasoulis, D. K., Ross, G., and Adams, N. M. 2007. Visualising the cluster structure of data streams. In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Intelligent data analysis. Springer-Verlag, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 81–92.
Teh, Y., Jordan, M., Beal, M., and Blei, D. 2006. Hierarchical dirichlet processes. Journal of the American Statistical Association 101, 476, 1566–1581.
Tsang, I. W., Kocsor, A., and Kwok, J. T. 2007. Simpler core vector machines with enclosing balls. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning. ACM, Corvalis, Oregon, 911–918.
Udommanetanakit, K., Rakthanmanon, T., and Waiyamai, K. 2007. E-stream: Evolutionbased technique for stream clustering. In Advanced Data Mining and Applications, R. Alhajj, H. Gao, X. Li, J. Li, and O. Zaane, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4632. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 605–615.
Vapnik, V. 1999. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer. Wan, L., Ng, W. K., Dang, X. H., Yu, P. S., and Zhang, K. 2009. Density-based clustering of
data streams at multiple resolutions. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 3, 3, 1–28.
Wang, H., Fan, W., Yu, P. S., and Han, J. 2003. Mining concept-drifting data streams using ensemble classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, Washington, D.C., 226–235.
Wang, W., Yang, J., and Muntz, R. 1997. Sting: A statistical information grid approach to spatial data mining. Proceedings of the International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, 186–195.
Zeng, H.-J., He, Q.-C., Chen, Z., Ma, W.-Y., and Ma, J. 2004. Learning to cluster web search results. In Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM, Sheﬃeld, United Kingdom, 210–217.
Zhang, P., Gao, B., Zhu, X., and Guo, L. 2011. Enabling fast lazy learning for data streams. In Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM-11). IEEE, Vancouver, Canada, 932–941.
Zhang, P., Li, J., Wang, P., Gao, B. J., Zhu, X., and Guo, L. 2011. Enabling fast prediction for ensemble models on data streams. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, San Diego, California, USA, 177– 185.
Zhang, P., Zhu, X., and Shi, Y. 2008. Categorizing and mining concept drifting data streams. In Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 812–820.
Zhang, P., Zhu, X., Shi, Y., Guo, L., and Wu, X. 2011. Robust ensemble learning for mining noisy data streams. Decision Support Systems 50, 2, 469–479.
Zhang, P., Zhu, X., Shi, Y., and Wu, X. 2009. An aggregate ensemble for mining concept drifting data streams with noise. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, T. Theeramunkong, B. Kijsirikul, N. Cercone, and T.-B. Ho, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5476. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 1021–1029.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

A Survey on Data Stream Clustering and Classiﬁcation · 37
Zhang, T., Ramakrishnan, R., and Livny, M. 1996. Birch: An eﬃcient data clustering method for very large databases. In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data. ACM, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 103–114.
Zhou, A., Cao, F., Qian, W., and Jin, C. 2008. Tracking clusters in evolving data streams over sliding windows. Knowledge and Information Systems 15, 2, 181–214.
Zliobaite, I. 2010. Learning under concept drift: an overview. Tech. rep., Vilnius University.

View publication stats

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Month 20YY.

