Automation Opportunity Discovery Exercise
Overview and Examples

Engagement approach and session overview

Pre-engagement
Kick-off
• “Art of the Possible” • Aligning to business
priorities • Assessing the potential
automation landscape • Engagement Guidelines • Expectations and
Deliverables

1
Introduction to Automation
• Understanding your business
• Understanding RPA • Extending RPA • Human-robot
engagement in a contact centre

3 2

Identification Workshops
• Opportunity Brainstorming
• Preliminary Assessment of RPA Suitability and Value Proposition

Prioritise

Follow-up Function interviews (Test)
• Process Observation and Measurement
• Functions gather evidence to support assessment
• Test Potential Process Opportunities and Benefit Identification.

Park

ITERATE (Approx. Weekly)

4

Process and Benefit Validation (Validate)
• Opportunity and Benefit Validation

Consolidated Recommendations and Pipeline

Engagement approach and session overview

Pre-engagement

Timing Objective

Kick-off: Set the Scene & Objectives
• “Art of the Possible”
• Aligning priorities
• Assessing the potential automation landscape
• Developing a consistent automation narrative
• Agree objectives & deliverables
Week 0
• Agree resources and timings • Set consistent messaging across
the program

Participants

Ops Managers Continuous Improvement Teams

1
Introduction to Automation
• Understanding your business
• Understanding RPA • Extending RPA • Human-robot
engagement in a contact centre

2
Identification Workshops
• Opportunity Brainstorming
• Preliminary Assessment of RPA Suitability and Value Proposition

Prioritise

4 3

Follow-up Function interviews (Test)
• Process Observation and Measurement
• Functions gather evidence to support assessment
• Test Potential Process Opportunities and Benefit Identification.

Process and Benefit Validation (Validate)
• Opportunity and Benefit Validation

Parked
ITERATE (Approx. Weekly)

Consolidated Recommendations and Pipeline

Day 1 1.5 hours

Day 2 or 3 2.5 hours

Set the scene, understand automation and allow time to go back to teams to generate ideas. Submit in Auto Hub

• Extend automation understanding • Rapid ideation of automation
opportunities • Enough information to prioritise
next steps

Relevant people with overall understanding of processes in context - e.g. process owners, managers, team leaders, long term experienced staff, continuous improvement.

Day 3 ongoing > TBC based on ideation
Any/all of: • Process interview (Complexity/Suitability) • Process screen walkthrough (Suitability) • Process owner Interview/data request
(Scope/Benefits)
TBC Based on Ideation - SMEs for opportunity (where
complexity/process assessment required) - Process Owner (where detailed benefit
assessment required) Group sessions per SME to minimise contact time

End of function Play back to identify gaps
Ops Managers, Managers, Continuous Improvement
Teams

Comments
The aim is to give sufficient time between understand the art of the possible in kick-off and ideation and the Identification workshops
The aim is to have the right people in the right sessions that can give the information required – earlier sessions = higher level view. Later sessions = detailed view.

Discovery Approach
A consultative, data driven approach to educate and support business investment whilst developing automation understanding and advocacy.
We aim to bring people along the journey with the support of management and an active change management approach.

•

Process Owners and Managers

•

are educated on the “Art of the

possible” with automation and

the traits of the best automation

opportunities.

Organisational Context/ Chart
Automation Uses Cases
Industry/Domain Experience
Activity Based Costing / Time & Motion Studies

Target Areas

Workshops are carried out on target functions or teams to generate ideas for automation. Where available, UiPath Automation Hub or other tools are used to continuously capture and evaluate ideas.
Pre-Workshop Homework

•

Organisational Context, Use

Cases and Industry Experience

are used to determine which

parts of the organisation to run

idea workshops.

Education & Idea Workshops

Assess Idea/s for Suitability and Readiness

Discovery Techniques
Targeted methods aligned to business priorities.

Journey Analysis & Data Driven Identification
End-to-end journey overview Back-end data perspective
Strategic Insights
• Process Execution Variation • Time Taken • Volumetrics
• Process Outcomes • Bottlenecks

Create Request Approve Request
Create PO Receive Goods

• Effort • # Involved • Frequency/Repetitive Processes • Variability •d

3 A day in the life

Open SAP Click on PO Select Invoice nr.
Press OK

Create POs
Manage Delivery
Dates
Prepare RFQs

Task Mining & Analysis Front-end perspective
Metric driven optimisation Detailed outputs
Operational Insights

Human-led Discovery
1 SME perspective Problem based 2
Targeted outputs
Organisational Insights
Business driver aligned enquiry: • Improve End User Experience • Improve Process or Output Quality • Increase Process Speed & Throughput • Increase Revenue Realized • Decrease Process Cost • Improve Insights & Decisions

Discovery Methodology
We go through three major assessment phases in our analysis. To ensure a focus on high value outcomes, based upon our understanding of the drivers that matter to you, we may park opportunities for later analysis along the way.

1.

RPA Suitability

Process is suitable for RPA or automation where the process is: • Mature and Stable; • Repetitive/High Volume/High Effort; • Has Structured Data Input; • Has a Defined Logic

2. Value Proposition (Benefits)

Process has a Strong Value Proposition which includes a spread of benefits across (but not limited to): • Returned Resource Capacity; • Improved Risk and/or Compliance Profile; • Improved Process Quality (Accuracy and Robustness); • Improved to Customer Satisfaction

Benefits Categorisation

Low Low-Medium
Medium Medium-High
High

<2.5 2.6 - 3.2 3.3 - 3.9 4.0 - 4.4 4.5 - 5.0

3. Effort to Launch
An Effort to Launch or T-shirt estimate is provided to assist with any further prioritisation required. T-Shirt estimate provides an indication of the effort (Build, Test, Deploy) required to automate the opportunity, being:

Build /Test Effort

S

2-3 weeks

M

4-6 weeks

L

7-10 weeks

XL

10+ weeks

Discovery Methodology - Insights
Enabling insights into the landscape of your automation opportunity.
Our data driven methods allow insight into the automation opportunity throughout the engagement so you can guide and direct the impact and make confident decision on the next steps for your delivery program.

Outcomes & Recommendations

We deliver insights and a balanced recommendation for next steps that informs your business case and planning.

Automation Landscape Insights
We use the data gathered through discovery to give insights into the automation potential across the areas of review to assist prioritisation and decision making.

Recommend Way Forward
Based on insights & engagement learnings, we provide recommendations on how to get started and resolve any challenges identified.

Business case & plan
We provide a high-level understanding of the benefits, costs, delivery plan and required business resources to support execution.

X Y Z
X Y Z
X Y Z

Unlocking AI. Automation. Analytics.
www.blackbook.ai | office@blackbook.ai

