How Well Sentence Embeddings Capture Meaning

Lyndon White lyndon.white@research.uwa.edu.au

Roberto Togneri

Wei Liu

roberto.togneri@uwa.edu.au wei.liu@uwa.edu.au

Mohammed Bennamoun mohammed.ben-
namoun@uwa.edu.au

The University of Western Australia 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, Western Australia

ABSTRACT
Several approaches for embedding a sentence into a vector space have been developed. However, it is unclear to what extent the sentence’s position in the vector space reﬂects its semantic meaning, rather than other factors such as syntactic structure. Depending on the model used for the embeddings this will vary – diﬀerent models are suited for diﬀerent down-stream applications. For applications such as machine translation and automated summarization, it is highly desirable to have semantic meaning encoded in the embedding. We consider this to be the quality of semantic localization for the model – how well the sentences’ meanings coincides with their embedding’s position in vector space. Currently the semantic localization is assessed indirectly through practical benchmarks for speciﬁc applications.
In this paper, we ground the semantic localization problem through a semantic classiﬁcation task. The task is to classify sentences according to their meaning. A SVM with a linear kernel is used to perform the classiﬁcation using the sentence vectors as its input. The sentences from subsets of two corpora, the Microsoft Research Paraphrase corpus and the Opinosis corpus, were partitioned according to their semantic equivalence. These partitions give the target classes for the classiﬁcation task. Several existing models, including URAE, PV–DM and PV–DBOW, were assessed against a bag of words benchmark.
General Terms
Measurement, Performance, Experimentation
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content Analysis and Indexing—Abstracting methods, Linguistic processing; I.2.7 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing—Language parsing and understanding
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. ADCS, December 08-09, 2015, Parramatta, NSW, Australia
c 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4040-3/15/12. . . $15.00 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2838931.2838932

Keywords
Semantic vector space representations, semantic consistency evaluation, sentence embeddings, word embeddings
1. INTRODUCTION
Sentence embeddings are often referred to as semantic vector space representations [7]. Embedding the meaning of a sentence into a vector space is expected to be very useful for natural language tasks. Vector representation of natural languages enables discourse analysis to take advantage of the array of tools available for computation in vector spaces. However, the embeddings of a sentence may encode a number of factors including semantic meaning, syntactic structure and topic. Since many of these embeddings are learned unsupervised on textual corpora using various models with diﬀerent training objectives, it is not entirely clear the emphasis placed on each factor in the encoding. For applications where encoding semantic meaning is particularly desirable, such as machine translation and automatic summarization, it is crucial to be able to assess how well the embeddings capture the sentence’s semantics. In other words, for successful application to these areas it is required that the embeddings generated by the models correctly encode meaning such that sentences with the same meaning are co-located in the vector space, and sentences with diﬀering meanings are further away. However, few current models are directly trained to optimize for this criteria.
Currently sentence embeddings are often generated as a byproduct of unsupervised, or semi-supervised, tasks. These tasks include: word prediction [10]; recreation of input, as in the auto-encoders of [22, 19] and [7]; and syntactic structural classiﬁcation [18, 21]. As a result the vector representations of the input sentences learned by these models are tuned towards the chosen optimization task. When employing the embeddings produced as features for other tasks, the information captured by the embeddings often proved to be very useful: e.g. approaching or exceeding previous state-of-theart results, in sentiment analysis [22, 20, 10] and paraphrase detection [19]. However these practical applications do not directly show how well meaning is captured by the embeddings.
This paper provides a new method to assess how well the models are capturing semantic information. A strict deﬁnition for the semantic equivalence of sentences is: that each sentence shall entail the other. Such mutually entailing sen-

tences are called paraphrases. In this paper we propose to use paraphrases to assess how well the true semantic space aligns with the vector space the models embed into. It thus assesses whether projecting a sentence via the models in to the vector space preserves meaning.
The evaluation corpora were prepared by grouping paraphrases from the Microsoft Research Paraphrase (MSRP) [3] and Opinosis [5] corpora. A semantic classiﬁcation task was deﬁned which assesses if the model’s embeddings could be used to correctly classify sentences as belonging to the paraphrase group with semantically equivalent sentences. Ensuring that sentences of common meaning, but diﬀering form are located in vector space together, is a challenging task and shows a model’s semantic encoding strength. This assessment, together with out recent work in the area, allows for a better understanding of how these models work, and suggest new directions for the development in this area.
The assessment proposed in this paper adds to the recent work on semantic evaluation methods, such as the work of Gershamn and Tenenbaum [6] and of Ritter et. al. [17]. In particular, the real-world corpus based assessment in this paper is highly complementary to the structured artiﬁcial corpus based assessment of Ritter et. al. These methods are discussed in more detail in the next section.
The rest of the paper is organized into the following sections. Section §2 discusses the existing models being assessed, the traditional assessment methods, and the aforementioned more recent semantic correctness based assessments. Section §3 describes the processes by which the models are evaluated using our new method, and the parameters used in the evaluation. Section §4 continues into more details on the development of the evaluation corpora for the semantic classiﬁcation evaluation task. Section §5 details the results from evaluating the models and discusses the implications for their semantic consistency. Section §6 closes the paper and suggests new directions for development.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Models
Three well known sentence embedding methods are evaluated in this work. The compositional distributed model of the Unfoldering Recussive Autoencoder (URAE) by Socher et. al. [19]; and the two word content predictive models, Distributed Memory (PV-DM) and Distributed Bag of Words by Le and Mikolov [10]. In addition to these advanced sentence embedding models, a simple average of word embeddings, from Mikolov et. al. [13], is also assessed. These models and their variant forms have been applied to a number of natural language processing tasks in the past, as detailed in the subsequent sections, but not to a real-sentence semantic classiﬁcation task as described here.
2.1.1 Unfolding Recursive Auto-Encoder (URAE)
The Unfolding Recursive Autoencoder (URAE) [19] is an autoencoder based method. It functions by recursively using a single layer feedforward neural-network to combine embedded representations, following the parse tree. Its optimization target is to be be able to reverse (unfold) the merges and produce the original sentence. The central folding layer – where the whole sentence is collapsed to a single embedding vector – is the sentence representation.

2.1.2 PV-DM
The Distributed Memory Paragraph Vectors (PV-DM) [10] method is based on an extension of the Continuous Bagof-Words word-embedding model [12]. It is trained using a sliding window of words to predict the next word. The softmax predictor network is fed a word-embedding for each word in the window, plus an additional sentence embedding vector which is reused for all words in the sentence – called the paragraph vector in [10]. These input embeddings can be concatenated or averaged; in the results below they were concatenated. During training both word and sentence vectors are allowed to vary, in evaluation (i.e. inference), the word vectors are locked and the sentence vector is trained until convergence on the prediction task occurs.
2.1.3 PV-DBOW
Distributed Bag of Words Paragraph Vectors (PV-DBOW) [10], is based on the Skip-gram model for word-embeddings, also from [12]. In PV-DBOW a sentence vector is used as the sole input to a neural net. That network is tasked with predicting the words in the sentence. At each training iteration, the network is tasked to predict a number of words from the sentence, selected with a speciﬁed window size, using the sentence vector being trained as the input. As with PV-DM to infer embedding the rest of the network is locked, and only the sentence vector input allowed to vary, it is then trained to convergence.
2.1.4 Sum and Mean of Word Embeddings (SOWE and MOWE)
Taking the element-wise sum or mean of the word embeddings over all words in the sentence also produces a vector with the potential to encode meaning. Like traditional bag of words no order information is encoded, but the model can take into consideration word relations such as synonymity as encoded by the word vectors. The mean was used as baseline in [10]. The sum of word embeddings ﬁrst considered in [13] for short phrases, it was found to be an eﬀective model for summarization in [9]. The cosine distance, as is commonly used when comparing distances between embeddings, is invariant between sum and mean of word embeddings. Both sum and mean of word embeddings are computationally cheap models, particularly given pretrained word embeddings are available.
2.2 General Evaluation Methods
As discussed in the introduction, current methods of evaluating the quality of embedding are on direct practical applications designed down-stream.
Evaluation on a Paraphrase Detection task takes the form of being presented with pairs of sentences and tasked with determining if the sentences are paraphrases or not. The MSRP Corpus, [3] which we used in the semantic classiﬁcation task, is intended for such use. This pairwise check is valuable, and does indicate to a certain extent if the embeddings are capturing meaning, or not. However, by considering groups of paraphrases, a deeper intuition can be gained on the arrangement of meaning within the vector space.
Sentiment Analysis is very commonly used task for evaluating embeddings. It was used both for the recursive autoencoder in [22] and for the paragraph vector models in [10]. Sentiment Analysis is classifying a text as positive or negative, or assigning a score as in the Sentiment Treebank

[23]. Determining the sentiment of a sentence is partially a semantic task, but it is lacking in several areas that would be required for meaning. For example, there is only an indirect requirement for the model to process the subject at all. Sentiment Analysis is a key task in natural language processing, but it is distinct from semantic meaning.
Document Classiﬁcation is a classic natural language processing task. A particular case of this is topic categorization. Early work in the area goes back to [11] and [1]. Much more recently it has been used to assess the convolution neural networks of [25], where the articles of several news corpora were classiﬁed into categories such as “Sports”, “Business” and “Entertainment”. A huge spectrum of diﬀerent sentences are assigned to the same topic. It is thus too board and insuﬃciently speciﬁc to evaluate the consistency of meanings. Information retrieval can be seen as the inverse of the document classiﬁcation task.
Information Retrieval is the task of identifying the documents which most match a query. Such document selection depends almost entirely on topic matching. Suitable results for information retrieval have no requirement to agree on meaning, though text with the same meaning are more likely to match the same queries.
The evaluation of semantic consistency requires a task which is ﬁne grained, and preserving meaning. Document Classiﬁcation and Information Retrieval are insuﬃciently ﬁne-grained. Sentiment Analysis does not preserve meaning, only semantic orientation. Paraphrase Detection is directly relevant to evaluating semantic constancy, however it is a binary choice based on a pairwise comparison – a more spatial application is desirable for evaluating these vector spaces. Thus the current down-steam application tasks are not sufﬁcient for assessing semantic consistency – more specialized methods are required.
2.3 Evaluations of Semantic Consistency
Semantic consistency for word embeddings is often measured using the analogy task. In an analogy the metarelation: A is to B as C is to D. Mikolov et. al.[14] demonstrated that the word-embedding models are semantically consistent by showing that the semantic relations between words were reﬂected as a linear oﬀset in the vector space. That is to say, for embeddings x˜a, x˜b, x˜c, x˜d corresponding to words A, B, C and D, respectively; it was tested that if for a strong relationship matching between A/B and C/D, then the oﬀset vector would be approximately equal: x˜b − x˜a x˜d − x˜c. Rearranging this in word space gets the often quoted example of King − Man + Woman Queen, As man is to woman, king is to queen. In the rating task as described by [8], the goal is to rank such analogous word pairs based on the degree the relation matches. Thus to evaluate the word-embedding model using this task, it was a matter of sorting closeness of the corresponding oﬀset vectors. Surprisingly strong results were found on this task[14]. It was thus demonstrated that word embeddings were not simply semantically consistent, but more so that this consistency was displayed as local linearity. This result gives conﬁdence in the semantic quality of the word embeddings. However, this relationship analogy test cannot be performed for sentence embeddings.
Gershman et. al. [6], compares the distances of modiﬁed sentences in vector space, to the semantic distances ascribed to them by human raters. Like the analogy task for

word vectors, this task requires ranking the targets based on the vector distance, however instead of rating on the strength of relationships it measures simply the similarities of the sentences to an original base sentence for each group. In that evaluation 30 simple base sentences of the form A [adjective1] [noun1] [prepositional phrase] [adjective2] [noun2] were modiﬁed to produce 4 diﬀerence derived sentences. The derived sentences were produced by swapping the nouns, swapping the adjectives, reversing the positional phrase (so behind becomes in front of), and a paraphrase by doing all of the aforementioned changes. Human raters were tasked with sorting the transformed sentences in similarity to the base sentence. This evaluation found that the embedding models considered did not agree with the semantic similarity rankings placed by humans. While the sentence embedding models performed poorly on the distance ranking measure, it is also worth considering how they perform on a meaning classiﬁcation task.
A meaning classiﬁcation task was recently proposed by Ritter et. al. [17], to classify sentences based on which spatial relationship was described. The task was to classify the sentence as describing: Adhesion to Vertical Surface, Support by Horizontal Surface, Full Containment, Partial Containment, or Support from Above. In this evaluation also, the sentences took a very structured form: There is a [noun1] [on/in] the [noun2]. These highly structured sentences take advantage of the disconnection between word content and the positional relationship described to form a task that must be solved by a compositional understanding combining the understanding of the words. “The apple is on the refrigerator ” and “The magnet is on the refrigerator” belong to two separate spatial categories, even though the word content is very similar. Surprisingly, the simple model of adding word vectors outperformed compositional models such as the recursive autoencoder. The result does have some limitation due to the highly artiﬁcial nature of the sentences, and the restriction to categorizing into a small number of classes based only on the meaning in terms of positional relationship. To generalize this task, in this paper we consider real world sentences being classed into groups according to their full semantic meaning.
3. METHODOLOGY
To evaluate how well a model’s vectors capture the meaning of a sentence, a semantic classiﬁcation task was deﬁned. The task is to classify sentences into classes where each shares the same meaning. Each class is thus deﬁned as a paraphrase groups. This is a far ﬁner-grained task than topic classiﬁcation. It is a multiclass classiﬁcation problem, rather than the binary decision problem of paraphrase detection. Such multiclass classiﬁcation requires the paraphrase groups to be projected into compact and distinct groups in the vector space. A model which produces such embeddings which are thus easily classiﬁable according to their meaning can been thus seen to have good semantic localization.
This semantic classiﬁcation does not have direct practical application – it is rare that the need will be to quantify sentences into groups with the same prior known meaning. Rather it serves as a measure to assess the models general suitability for other tasks requiring a model with consistency between meaning and embedding.
To evaluate the success at the task three main processes are involved, as shown in Figure 1: Corpus Preparation,

Model Preparation

Model

Pretraining

Trained model

Corpus Preparation

Base Corpus

Paraphrase Grouping

Infer Embeddings
Subcorpus Sentences

Semantic Classiﬁcation
SVM Training

Test–Train Set
Splitting

Training Paraphrases
Testing Paraphrases

Trained SVM
SVM Evaluation

Classiﬁcation Accuracy

Figure 1: Process Diagram for the Evaluation of Semantic Consistency via our method

Model Preparation, and the Semantic Classiﬁcation task itself.
3.1 Corpus Preparation
The construction of each of the corpora is detailed more fully in the next section. In brief: Two corpora were constructed by selecting subsets of the Microsoft Research Paraphrase (MSRP) [3] and of the Opinosis [5] corpora. The corpora were partitioned into groups of paraphrases – sentences with the same meaning. Any paraphrase groups with less than three sentences were discarded. The paraphrase grouping was carried out manually for Opinosis, and automatically for the MSRP corpus using the existing paraphrase pairings. The paraphrase groups divide the total semantic space of the corpora into discrete classes, where each class contains sentences sharing the same meaning.
It is by comparing the ability of the models to produce embeddings which can be classiﬁed back into these classes, that we can compare the real semantic space partitions to their corresponding vector embedding space regions.
3.2 Model Preparation and Inferring Vectors
Prior to application to semantic classiﬁcation, as with any task the models had to be pretrained. Here we use the term pretraining to diﬀerentiate the model training from the classiﬁer training. The pretraining is not done using the evaluation corpora as they are both very small. Instead other data are used, and the inference/evaluation procedure given for each method was then used to produce the vectors for each sentence. The model parameters used are detailed below.
3.2.1 Unfolding Recursive Auto-Encoder (URAE)
In this evaluation we make use of the pretrained network that Socher et. al. have graciously made available1, full in-
1http://www.socher.org/index.php/Main/DynamicPoolingAndUnfoldingRecursiveAutoencodersForParaphraseDetection

formation is available in the paper[19]. It is initialized on the unsupervised Collobert and Weston word embeddings[2], and training on a subset of 150,000 sentences from the gigaword corpus. It produces embeddings with 200 dimensions. This pretrained model when used with dynamic pooling and other word based features performed very well on the MSRP corpus paraphrase detection. However in the evaluation below the dynamic pooling techniques are not used as they are only directly suitable for enhancing pairwise comparisons between sentences.
3.2.2 Paragraph Vector Methods (PV-DM and PVDBOW)
Both PV-DM and PV-DBOW, were evaluated using the GenSim implementation [16] from the current develop branch2. Both were trained on approximately 1.2 million sentences from randomly selected Wikipedia articles, and the window size was set to 8 words, and the vectors were of 300 dimensions.
3.2.3 Sum and Mean of Word Embeddings (SOWE and MOWE)
The word embeddings used for MOWE were taken from the Google News pretrained model3 based on the method described in [13]. This has been trained on 100 million sentences from Google News. A small portion of the evaluation corpus did not have embeddings in the Google News model. These tokens were largely numerals, punctuation symbols, proper nouns and unusual spellings, as well as the stop-words: “and”, “a” and “of”. These words were simply skipped. The resulting embeddings have 300 dimensions, like the word embeddings they were based on.
2https://github.com/piskvorky/gensim/tree/develop/ 3https://code.google.com/p/word2vec/

3.2.4 Bag of Words (BOW and PCA BOW)
A bag of words (BOW) model is also presented as a baseline. There is a dimension in each vector embedding for the count of each token, including punctuation, in the sentence. In the Opinosis and MSRP subcorpora there were a total of 1,085 and 2,976 unique tokens respectively, leading to BOW embeddings of corresponding dimensionality. As it is a distributional rather than distributed representation, the BOW model does not need any pretraining step. For comparison to the lower dimensional models Principle Component Analysis (PCA) was applied to the BOW embeddings to produce an additional baseline set of embeddings of 300 dimensions – in line with PV-DM, PV-DBOW, SOWE, and MOWE models. It does not quite follow the steps shown in Figure 1, as the PCA pretraining step is performed on the training embeddings only during the SVM classiﬁcation process, and it is used to infer the PCA BOW embeddings during the testing step. This avoids unfair information transfer where the PCA would otherwise be about to choose representations optimized for the whole set, including the test data. It was found that when the PCA model was allowed to cheat in this way it performed a few percentage points better. The bag of words models do not have any outside knowledge.
3.3 Semantic Classiﬁcation
The core of this evaluation procedure is in the semantic classiﬁcation step. A support vector machine (SVM), with a linear kernel, and class weighting was applied to the task of predicting which paraphrase group each sentence belongs to. Classiﬁcation was veriﬁed using 3-fold cross-validation across diﬀerent splits of the testing/training data, the average results are shown in this section. The splits were in proportion to the class size. For the smallest groups this means there were two training cases and one test case to classify.
In this paper, only a linear kernel was used, because a more powerful kernel such as RBF may be able to compensate for irregularities in the vector space, which makes model comparison more diﬃcult. Scikit-learn [15] was used to orchestrate the cross-validation and to interface with the LibLinear SVM implementation [4]. As the linear SVM’s classiﬁcation success depends on how linearly separable the input data is, thus this assessed the quality of the localization of the paraphrase groupings embeddings.
4. CORPUS CONSTRUCTION
4.1 Microsoft Research Paraphrased Grouped Subcorpus
The MSRP corpus is a very well established data set for the paraphrase detection task [3]. Sentences are presented as pairs which are either paraphrases, or not. A signiﬁcant number of paraphrases appear in multiple diﬀerent pairings. Using this information, groups of paraphrases can be formed.
The corpus was partitioned according to sentence meaning by taking the symmetric and transitive closures the set of paraphrase pairs. For example if sentences A, B, C and D were present in the original corpus as paraphrase pairs: A, B, D, A and B, C then the paraphrase group {A, B, C, D} is found. Any paraphrase groups containing less than 3 phrases were discarded. The resulting sub-corpus has the breakdown as shown in Figure 2.

Number of Paraphrase Groups

250

MSRP Subcorpus

200

150

100

50

00 1 2 3 4 5 6 Number of Paraphrases

Figure 2: Break down of how many paraphrases groups are present in the MSRP subcorpus of which sizes.It contains a total of 859 unique sentences, broken up into 273 paraphrase groups.

Number of Paraphrase Groups

40

Opinosis Subcorpus

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Number of Paraphrases

Figure 3: Break down of how many paraphrases groups are present in the Opinosis subcorpus of which sizes. It contains a total of 521 unique sentences, broken up into 89 paraphrase groups.

4.2 Opinosis Paraphrase Grouped Subcorpus
The Opinosis Corpus[5] was used as secondary source of original real-world text. It is sourced from several online review sites: Tripadvisor, Edmunds.com, and Amazon.com, and contains single sentence statements about hotels, cars and electronics. The advantage of this as a source for texts is that comments on the quality of services and products tend to be along similar lines. The review sentences are syntactically simpler than sentences from a news-wire corpus, and also contain less named entities. However, as they are from more casual communications, the adherence to grammar and spelling may be less formal.
Paraphrases were identiﬁed using the standard criterion: bidirectional entailment. For a paraphrase group S of sentences: ∀s1, s2 ∈ S, s1 s2 ∧ s2 s1, every sentence in the group entails the every other sentence in the group. A stricter interpretation of bidirectional entailment was used, as compared to the “mostly bidirectional entailment” used in the MSRP corpus. The grouping was carried out manually. Where it was unclear as to the group a particular phrase should belong to it was left out of the corpus entirely. The general guidelines were as follows.

PV-DM PV-DBOW
URAE MOWE SOWE BOW PCA BOW

MSRP Subcorpus
78.00% 89.93% 51.14% 97.91% 98.02% 98.37% 97.96%

Opinosis Subcorpus
38.26% 32.19% 20.86% 69.30% 68.75% 65.23% 54.43%

Table 1: The semantic classiﬁcation accuracy of the various models across the two evaluation corpora.

• Tense, Transitional Phrases, and Discourse and Pragmatic Markers were ignored.
• Statement intensity was coarsely quantized.
• Approximately equal quantitative and qualitative values were treated as synonymous.
• Sentences with entities mentioned explicitly were grouped separately from similar statements where they were implied.
• Sentences with additional information were grouped separately from those without that information.
The ﬁnal point is the most signiﬁcant change from the practices apparent in the construction of the MSRP corpus. Sentences with diﬀering or additional information were classiﬁed as non-paraphrases. This requirement comes from the deﬁnition of bidirectional entailment. For example, “The staﬀ were friendly and polite.”, “The staﬀ were polite.” and “The staﬀ were friendly.” are in three separate paraphrase groups. The creators of the MSRP corpus, however, note “...the majority of the equivalent pairs in this dataset exhibit ‘mostly bidirectional entailments’, with one sentence containing information ‘that diﬀers’ from or is not contained in the other.” [3]. While this does lead to more varied paraphrases; it strays from the strict linguistic deﬁnition of a paraphrase, which complicates the evaluation of the semantic space attempted here. This stricter adherence to bidirectional entailment resulted in ﬁner separation of groups, which makes this a more challenging corpus.
After the corpus had been broken into paraphrase groups some simple post-processing was done. Several artifacts present in the original corpus were removed, such as substituting the ampersand symbol for &amp. Any paraphrase groups containing identical sentences were merged, and duplicates removed. Finally, any group with less than three phrases was discarded. With this complete the breakdown is as in Figure 3.
Further information on the construction of the corpora in this section, and download links are available online.4
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.1 Classiﬁcation Results and Discussion
The results of performing the evaluation method described in Section §3 are shown in Table 1.
4http://white.ucc.asn.au/resources/paraphrase grouped corpora/

While the relative performance of the models is similar between the corpora, the absolute performance diﬀers. On the absolute scale, all the models perform much better on the MSRP subcorpus than on the Opinosis subcorpus. This can be attributed to the signiﬁcantly more distinct classes in the MSRP subcorpus. The Opinosis subcorpus draws a ﬁner line between sentences with similar meanings. As discussed earlier, for example there is a paraphrase group for “The staﬀ were polite.”, another for “The staﬀ were friendly.”, and a third for “The staﬀ were friendly and polite.”. Under the guidelines used for paraphrases in MSRP, these would all have been considered the same group. Secondly, there is a much wider range of topics in the MSRP. Thus the paraphrase groups with diﬀerent meanings in MSRP corpus are also more likely to have diﬀerent topic entirely than those from Opinosis. Thus the the ground truth of the semantics separability of phrases from the MSRP corpus is higher than for Opinosis, making the semantic classiﬁcation of the Opinosis subcorpus is a more challenging task.
The URAE model performs the worst of all models evaluated. In [9] is was suggested that the URAE’s poor performance at summarizing the Opinosis corpus could potentially be attributed to the less formally structured product reviews – the URAE being a highly structured compositional model. However, here it also performed poorly on the MSRP – which it was created for [19]. The exact same model from [19] was used here – though this did put it at a dimensional disadvantage over the other models having 200 dimensions to the other’s 300. The key diﬀerence from [19], beyond the changing to a multiclass classiﬁcation problem, was the lack of the complementary word-level features as used in the dynamic pooling layer. This suggests the model could beneﬁt from such world level features – as the very strong performance of the word-based model indicates.
The word based models, MOWE, SOWE, BOW and PCA BOW, performed very well. This suggests that word choice is a very signiﬁcant factor in determining meaning; so much so that the models which can make use of word order information, URAE and PV-DM, were signiﬁcantly outperformed by methods which made more direct use of the word content.
The very high performance of the BOW maybe attributed to its very high dimensionality, though the MOWE and SOWE performed similarly. The PCA step can be considered as being similar to choosing an optimal set of words to keep so as to maximum variability in the bag of words. It loses little performance, even though decreasing vector size by an order of magnitude – particularly on the easier MSRP dataset.
5.2 Model Agreement
The misclassiﬁcations of the models can be compared. By selecting one of the test/train folds from the classiﬁcation task above, and comparing the predicted classiﬁcations for each test-set sentence, the similarities of the models were assessed. The heatmaps in Figure 4 show the agreement in errors. Here misclassiﬁcation agreement is given as an approximation to P (m1(x) = m2(x) | m1(x) = y ∧ m2(x) = y), for a randomly selected sentence x, with ground truth classiﬁcation y, where the models m1 and m2 are used to produce classiﬁcations. Only considering the cases where both models were incorrect, rather than simple agreement, avoids the analysis being entirely dominated by the agreement of the

MSRP

1.0

OPINOSIS

1.0

PV-DM 2 3 2 2 1 3

PV-DM 9 6 9 9 13 17

63 20 46 7 6 4 6

0.9

109 81 98 50 47 60 59

0.9

PV-DBOW 3 4 4 3 3

0.8

32 24 8 7 4 6

0.7

URAE 1 1 0 2

138 8 7 4 6

0.6

MOWE 7 4 5

0.5

87 4 6

SOWE 4 4

0.4

7 4 5 0.3

BOW 3

44

0.2

PV-DBOW 4 13 11 10 10

0.8

109 96 47 46 55 55

0.7

URAE 7 6 7 9

135 50 48 57 59

0.6

MOWE 40 24 27

0.5

55 48 44 42

SOWE 21 30

0.4

52 41 43 0.3

BOW 39

63 57

0.2

PCA BOW

0.1

6

0.0

PCA BOW

0.1

65

0.0

Figure 4: The misclassiﬁcation agreement between each of the models for the MSRP (left) and Opinosis (right) subcorpora. Below each model name is the total mistakes made. The denominator of each fraction is the number of test cases incorrectly classiﬁed by both models. The numerator is the portion of those misclassiﬁcations which were classiﬁed in the same (incorrect) way by both models. The shading is in-proportion to that fraction.

models with the ground truth. The word based models showed signiﬁcant agreement. Un-
surprisingly MOWE and SOWE have almost complete agreement in both evaluations. The other models showed less agreement – while they got many of the same cases wrong the models produced diﬀerent misclassiﬁcations. This overall suggests that the various full sentence models are producing substantially dissimilar maps from meaning to vector space. Thus it seems reasonable that using a ensemble approach between multiple sentence models and one wordbased model would produce strong results. Yin and Schu¨tze [24] found this successful when combining diﬀerent word embedding models.
5.3 Limitations
This evaluation has some limitations. As with all such empirical evaluations of machine learning models, a more optimal choice of hyper-parameters and training data will have an impact on the performance. In particular, if the model training was on the evaluation data the models would be expected to be better able to position their embedding. This was however unfeasible due to the small sizes of the datasets used for evaluation, and would not reﬂect real word application of the models to data not prior seen. Beyond the limitation of the use of the datasets is their contents.
The paraphrase groups were not selected to be independent of the word content overlap – they were simply collected on commonality of meaning from real world sourced corpora. This is a distinct contrast to the the work of Ritter et. al.[17] discussed in section 2.3 where the classes were chosen to not have meaningful word overlap. However our work is complementary to theirs, and our ﬁndings are well aligned. The key diﬀerence in performance is the magnitude of the performance of the sum of word embeddings (comparable to the mean of word embeddings evaluated here). In [17] the

word embedding model performed similarly to the best of the more complex models. In the results presented above we ﬁnd that the word embedding based model performs signiﬁcantly beyond the more complex models. This can be attributed to the word overlap in the paraphrase groups – in real-world speech people trying to say the same thing do in-fact use the same words very often.
6. CONCLUSION
A method was presented, to evaluate the semantic localization of sentence embedding models. Semantically equivalent sentences are those which exhibit bidirectional entailment – they each imply the truth of the other. Paraphrases are semantically equivalent. The evaluation method is a semantic classiﬁcation task – to classify sentences as belonging to a paraphrase group of semantically equivalent sentences. The datasets used were derived from subsets of existing sources, the MRSP and the Opinosis corpora. The relative performance of various models was consistent across the two tasks, though diﬀered on an absolute scale.
The word embedding and bag of word models performed best, followed by the paragraph vector models, with the URAE trailing in both tests. The strong performance of the sum and mean of word embeddings (SOWE and MOWE) compared to the more advanced models aligned with the results of Ritter et. al.[17]. The diﬀerence in performance presented here for real-word sentences, were more marked than for the synthetic sentence used by Ritter et. al. This may be attributed to real-world sentences often having meaning overlap correspondent to word overlap – as seen also in the very strong performance of bag of words. Combining the result of this work with those of Ritter et. al., it can be concluded that summing word vector representations is a practical and surprisingly eﬀective method for encoding the meaning of a sentence.

Acknowledgement
This research is supported by the Australian Postgraduate Award, and partially funded by Australian Research Council DP150102405 and LP110100050.
7. REFERENCES
[1] H. Borko and M. Bernick. Automatic document classiﬁcation. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 10(2):151–162, 1963.
[2] R. Collobert and J. Weston. A uniﬁed architecture for natural language processing: Deep neural networks with multitask learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning, pages 160–167. ACM, 2008.
[3] W. B. Dolan and C. Brockett. Automatically constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases. In Third International Workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP2005). Asia Federation of Natural Language Processing, 2005.
[4] R.-E. Fan, K.-W. Chang, C.-J. Hsieh, X.-R. Wang, and C.-J. Lin. LIBLINEAR: A library for large linear classiﬁcation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874, 2008.
[5] K. Ganesan, C. Zhai, and J. Han. Opinosis: a graph-based approach to abstractive summarization of highly redundant opinions. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 340–348. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010.
[6] S. J. Gershman and J. B. Tenenbaum. Phrase similarity in humans and machines. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2015.
[7] M. Iyyer, J. Boyd-Graber, and H. D. III. Generating sentences from semantic vector space representations. In NIPS Workshop on Learning Semantics, 2014.
[8] D. A. Jurgens, P. D. Turney, S. M. Mohammad, and K. J. Holyoak. Semeval-2012 task 2: Measuring degrees of relational similarity. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 356–364. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012.
[9] M. K˚ageb¨ack, O. Mogren, N. Tahmasebi, and D. Dubhashi. Extractive summarization using continuous vector space models. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Continuous Vector Space Models and their Compositionality (CVSC)@ EACL, pages 31–39, 2014.
[10] Q. Le and T. Mikolov. Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-14), pages 1188–1196, 2014.
[11] M. E. Maron. Automatic indexing: an experimental inquiry. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 8(3):404–417, 1961.
[12] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean. Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
[13] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in

Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 3111–3119, 2013.
[14] T. Mikolov, W.-t. Yih, and G. Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representations. In HLT-NAACL, pages 746–751, 2013.
[15] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[16] R. Rˇ eh˚uˇrek and P. Sojka. Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–50, Valletta, Malta, May 2010. ELRA. http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en.
[17] S. Ritter, C. Long, D. Paperno, M. Baroni, M. Botvinick, and A. Goldberg. Leveraging preposition ambiguity to assess compositional distributional models of semantics. The Fourth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, 2015.
[18] R. Socher, J. Bauer, C. D. Manning, and A. Y. Ng. Parsing with compositional vector grammars. In ACL. 2013.
[19] R. Socher, E. H. Huang, J. Pennington, A. Y. Ng, and C. D. Manning. Dynamic pooling and unfolding recursive autoencoders for paraphrase detection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 24. 2011.
[20] R. Socher, B. Huval, C. D. Manning, and A. Y. Ng. Semantic compositionality through recursive matrix-vector spaces. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning, pages 1201–1211. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012.
[21] R. Socher, C. D. Manning, and A. Y. Ng. Learning continuous phrase representations and syntactic parsing with recursive neural networks. In Proceedings of the NIPS-2010 Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning Workshop, pages 1–9, 2010.
[22] R. Socher, J. Pennington, E. H. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and C. D. Manning. Semi-supervised recursive autoencoders for predicting sentiment distributions. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2011.
[23] R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Y. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Y. Ng, and C. Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), volume 1631, page 1642. Citeseer, 2013.
[24] W. Yin and H. Schu¨tze. Learning word meta-embeddings by using ensembles of embedding sets. Aug. 2015.
[25] X. Zhang and Y. LeCun. Text understanding from scratch. CoRR, Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015.

