arXiv:1707.07435v7 [cs.IR] 10 Jul 2019

1
Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives
SHUAI ZHANG, University of New South Wales LINA YAO, University of New South Wales AIXIN SUN, Nanyang Technological University YI TAY, Nanyang Technological University
With the ever-growing volume of online information, recommender systems have been an e ective strategy to overcome such information overload. e utility of recommender systems cannot be overstated, given its widespread adoption in many web applications, along with its potential impact to ameliorate many problems related to over-choice. In recent years, deep learning has garnered considerable interest in many research elds such as computer vision and natural language processing, owing not only to stellar performance but also the a ractive property of learning feature representations from scratch. e in uence of deep learning is also pervasive, recently demonstrating its e ectiveness when applied to information retrieval and recommender systems research. Evidently, the eld of deep learning in recommender system is ourishing. is article aims to provide a comprehensive review of recent research e orts on deep learning based recommender systems. More concretely, we provide and devise a taxonomy of deep learning based recommendation models, along with providing a comprehensive summary of the state-of-the-art. Finally, we expand on current trends and provide new perspectives pertaining to this new exciting development of the eld. CCS Concepts: •Information systems → Recommender systems;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Recommender System; Deep Learning; Survey
ACM Reference format: Shuai Zhang, Lina Yao, Aixin Sun, and Yi Tay. 2018. Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives. ACM Comput. Surv. 1, 1, Article 1 (July 2018), 35 pages. DOI: 0000001.0000001
1 INTRODUCTION Recommender systems are an intuitive line of defense against consumer over-choice. Given the explosive growth of information available on the web, users are o en greeted with more than countless products, movies or restaurants. As such, personalization is an essential strategy for facilitating a be er user experience. All in all, these systems have been playing a vital and indispensable role in various information access systems to boost business and facilitate decision-making process [69, 121] and are pervasive across numerous web domains such as e-commerce and/or media websites.
In general, recommendation lists are generated based on user preferences, item features, user-item past interactions and some other additional information such as temporal (e.g., sequence-aware recommender) and
Yi Tay is added as an author later to help revise the paper for the major revision. Author’s addresses: S. Zhang and L. Yao, University of New South Wales; emails: shuai.zhang@unsw.edu.au; lina.yao@unsw.edu.au; A. Sun and Y. Tay, Nanyang Technological University; email: axsun@ntu.edu.sg; ytay017@e.ntu.edu.sg; ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co-authored by an employee, or contractor of the national government. As such, the Government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to publish or reproduce this article, or to allow others to do so, for Government purposes only. Permission to make digital or hard copies for personal or classroom use is granted. Copies must bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. To copy otherwise, distribute, republish, or post, requires prior speci c permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. © 2018 ACM. 0360-0300/2018/7-ART1 $15.00 DOI: 0000001.0000001
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:2 • S. Zhang et al.
spatial (e.g., POI recommender) data. Recommendation models are mainly categorized into collaborative ltering, content-based recommender system and hybrid recommender system based on the types of input data [1].
Deep learning enjoys a massive hype at the moment. e past few decades have witnessed the tremendous success of the deep learning (DL) in many application domains such as computer vision and speech recognition.
e academia and industry have been in a race to apply deep learning to a wider range of applications due to its capability in solving many complex tasks while providing start-of-the-art results [27]. Recently, deep learning has been revolutionizing the recommendation architectures dramatically and brings more opportunities to improve the performance of recommender. Recent advances in deep learning based recommender systems have gained signi cant a ention by overcoming obstacles of conventional models and achieving high recommendation quality. Deep learning is able to e ectively capture the non-linear and non-trivial user-item relationships, and enable the codi cation of more complex abstractions as data representations in the higher layers. Furthermore, it catches the intricate relationships within the data itself, from abundant accessible data sources such as contextual, textual and visual information.
Pervasiveness and ubiquity of deep learning in recommender systems. In industry, recommender systems are critical tools to enhance user experience and promote sales/services for many online websites and mobile applications [20, 27, 30, 43, 113]. For example, 80 percent of movies watched on Net ix came from recommendations [43], 60 percent of video clicks came from home page recommendation in YouTube [30]. Recently, many companies employ deep learning for further enhancing their recommendation quality [20, 27, 113]. Covington et al. [27] presented a deep neural network based recommendation algorithm for video recommendation on YouTube. Cheng et al. [20] proposed an App recommender system for Google Play with a wide & deep model. Shumpei et al. [113] presented a RNN based news recommender system for Yahoo News. All of these models have stood the online testing and shown signi cant improvement over traditional models. us, we can see that deep learning has driven a remarkable revolution in industrial recommender applications.
e number of research publications on deep learning based recommendation methods has increased exponentially in these years, providing strong evidence of the inevitable pervasiveness of deep learning in recommender system research. e leading international conference on recommender system, RecSys1, started to organize regular workshop on deep learning for recommender system2 since the year 2016. is workshop aims to promote research and encourage applications of deep learning based recommender system.
e success of deep learning for recommendation both in academia and in industry requires a comprehensive review and summary for successive researchers and practitioners to be er understand the strength and weakness, and application scenarios of these models.
What are the di erences between this survey and former ones? Plenty of research has been done in the eld of deep learning based recommendation. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are very few systematic reviews which well shape this area and position existing works and current progresses. Although some works have explored the recommender applications built on deep learning techniques and have a empted to formalize this research eld, few has sought to provide an in-depth summary of current e orts or detail the open problems present in the area. is survey seeks to provide such a comprehensive summary of current research on deep learning based recommender systems, to identify open problems currently limiting real-world implementations and to point out future directions along this dimension.
In the last few years, a number of surveys in traditional recommender systems have been presented. For example, Su et al. [138] presented a systematic review on collaborative ltering techniques; Burke et al. [8] proposed a comprehensive survey on hybrid recommender system; Ferna´ndez-Tob´ıas et al. [40] and Khan et al. [74] reviewed the cross-domain recommendation models; to name a few. However, there is a lack of extensive
1h ps://recsys.acm.org/ 2h p://dlrs-workshop.org/
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:3
review on deep learning based recommender system. To the extent of our knowledge, only two related short surveys [7, 97] are formally published. Betru et al. [7] introduced three deep learning based recommendation models [123, 153, 159], although these three works are in uential in this research area, this survey lost sight of other emerging high quality works. Liu et al. [97] reviewed 13 papers on deep learning for recommendation, and proposed to classify these models based on the form of inputs (approaches using content information and approaches without content information) and outputs (rating and ranking). However, with the constant advent of novel research works, this classi cation framework is no longer suitable and a new inclusive framework is required for be er understanding of this research eld. Given the rising popularity and potential of deep learning applied in recommender system, a systematic survey will be of high scienti c and practical values. We analyzed these works from di erent perspectives and presented some new insights toward this area. To this end, over 100 studies were shortlisted and classi ed in this survey.
How do we collect the papers? In this survey, we collected over a hundred of related papers. We used Google Scholar as the main search engine, we also adopted the database, Web of Science, as an important tool to discover related papers. In addition, we screened most of the related high-pro le conferences such as NIPS, ICML, ICLR, KDD, WWW, SIGIR, WSDM, RecSys, etc., just to name a few, to nd out the recent work. e major keywords we used including: recommender system, recommendation, deep learning, neural networks, collaborative ltering, matrix factorization, etc.
Contributions of this survey. e goal of this survey is to thoroughly review literature on the advances of deep learning based recommender system. It provides a panorama with which readers can quickly understand and step into the eld of deep learning based recommendation. is survey lays the foundations to foster innovations in the area of recommender system and tap into the richness of this research area. is survey serves the researchers, practitioners, and educators who are interested in recommender system, with the hope that they will have a rough guideline when it comes to choosing the deep neural networks to solve recommendation tasks at hand. To summarize, the key contributions of this survey are three-folds: (1) We conduct a systematic review for recommendation models based on deep learning techniques and propose a classi cation scheme to position and organize the current work; (2) We provide an overview and summary for the state-of-the-arts. (3) We discuss the challenges and open issues, and identify the new trends and future directions in this research eld to share the vision and expand the horizons of deep learning based recommender system research.
e remaining of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the preliminaries for recommender systems and deep neural networks, we also discuss the advantages and disadvantages of deep neural network based recommendation models. Section 3 rstly presents our classi cation framework and then gives detailed introduction to the state-of-the-art. Section 4 discusses the challenges and prominent open research issues. Section 5 concludes the paper.
2 OVERVIEW OF RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS AND DEEP LEARNING
Before we dive into the details of this survey, we start with an introduction to the basic terminology and concepts regarding recommender system and deep learning techniques. We also discuss the reasons and motivations of introducing deep neural networks to recommender systems.
2.1 Recommender Systems
Recommender systems estimate users’ preference on items and recommend items that users might like to them proactively [1, 121]. Recommendation models are usually classi ed into three categories [1, 69]: collaborative
ltering, content based and hybrid recommender system. Collaborative ltering makes recommendations by learning from user-item historical interactions, either explicit (e.g. user’s previous ratings) or implicit feedback (e.g. browsing history). Content-based recommendation is based primarily on comparisons across items’ and users’
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:4 • S. Zhang et al.
auxiliary information. A diverse range of auxiliary information such as texts, images and videos can be taken into account. Hybrid model refers to recommender system that integrates two or more types of recommendation strategies [8, 69].
Suppose we have M users and N items, and R denotes the interaction matrix and Rˆ denotes the predicted interaction matrix. Let rui denote the preference of user u to item i, and rˆui denote the predicted score. Meanwhile, we use a partially observed vector (rows of R) r(u) = {ru1, ..., ruN } to represent each user u, and partially observed vector (columns of R) r(i) = {r 1i , ..., r Mi } to represent each item i. O and O− denote the observed and unobserved interaction set. we use U ∈ RM×k and V ∈ RN ×k to denote user and item latent factor. k is the dimension of latent factors. In addition, sequence information such as timestamp can also be considered to make sequence-aware recommendations. Other notations and denotations will be introduced in corresponding sections.
2.2 Deep Learning Techniques
Deep learning can be generally considered to be sub- eld of machine learning. e typical de ning essence of deep learning is that it learns deep representations, i.e., learning multiple levels of representations and abstractions from data. For practical reasons, we consider any neural di erentiable architecture as ‘deep learning‘ as long as it optimizes a di erentiable objective function using a variant of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Neural architectures have demonstrated tremendous success in both supervised and unsupervised learning tasks [31]. In this subsection, we clarify a diverse array of architectural paradigms that are closely related to this survey.
• Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) is a feed-forward neural network with multiple (one or more) hidden layers between the input layer and output layer. Here, the perceptron can employ arbitrary activation function and does not necessarily represent strictly binary classi er. MLPs can be intrepreted as stacked layers of nonlinear transformations, learning hierarchical feature representations. MLPs are also known to be universal approximators.
• Autoencoder (AE) is an unsupervised model a empting to reconstruct its input data in the output layer. In general, the bo leneck layer (the middle-most layer) is used as a salient feature representation of the input data. ere are many variants of autoencoders such as denoising autoencoder, marginalized denoising autoencoder, sparse autoencoder, contractive autoencoder and variational autoencoder (VAE) [15, 45].
• Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [45] is a special kind of feedforward neural network with convolution layers and pooling operations. It can capture the global and local features and signi cantly enhancing the e ciency and accuracy. It performs well in processing data with grid-like topology.
• Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [45] is suitable for modelling sequential data. Unlike feedforward neural network, there are loops and memories in RNN to remember former computations. Variants such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) network are o en deployed in practice to overcome the vanishing gradient problem.
• Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is a two layer neural network consisting of a visible layer and a hidden layer. It can be easily stacked to a deep net. Restricted here means that there are no intra-layer communications in visible layer or hidden layer.
• Neural Autoregressive Distribution Estimation (NADE) [81, 152] is an unsupervised neural network built atop autoregressive model and feedforward neural networks. It is a tractable and e cient estimator for modelling data distribution and densities.
• Adversarial Networks (AN) [46] is a generative neural network which consists of a discriminator and a generator. e two neural networks are trained simultaneously by competing with each other in a minimax game framework.
• A entional Models (AM) are di erentiable neural architectures that operate based on so content addressing over an input sequence (or image). A ention mechanism is typically ubiquitous and was
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:5
incepted in Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing domains. However, it has also been an emerging trend in deep recommender system research. • Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [106]. Reinforcement learning operates on a trial-and-error paradigm.
e whole framework mainly consists of the following components: agents, environments, states, actions and rewards. e combination between deep neural networks and reinforcement learning formulate DRL which have achieved human-level performance across multiple domains such as games and selfdriving cars. Deep neural networks enable the agent to get knowledge from raw data and derive e cient representations without handcra ed features and domain heuristics.
Note that there are numerous advanced model emerging each year, here we only brie y listed some important ones. Readers who are interested in the details or more advanced models are referred to [45].
2.3 Why Deep Neural Networks for Recommendation?
Before diving into the details of recent advances, it is bene cial to understand the reasons of applying deep learning techniques to recommender systems. It is evident that numerous deep recommender systems have been proposed in a short span of several years. e eld is indeed bustling with innovation. At this point, it would be easy to question the need for so many di erent architectures and/or possibly even the utility of neural networks for the problem domain. Along the same tangent, it would be apt to provide a clear rationale of why each proposed architecture and to which scenario it would be most bene cial for. All in all, this question is highly relevant to the issue of task, domains and recommender scenarios. One of the most a ractive properties of neural architectures is that they are (1) end-to-end di erentiable and (2) provide suitable inductive biases catered to the input data type. As such, if there is an inherent structure that the model can exploit, then deep neural networks ought to be useful. For instance, CNNs and RNNs have long exploited the instrinsic structure in vision (and/or human language). Similarly, the sequential structure of session or click-logs are highly suitable for the inductive biases provided by recurrent/convolutional models [56, 143, 175].
Moreover, deep neural networks are also composite in the sense that multiple neural building blocks can be composed into a single (gigantic) di erentiable function and trained end-to-end. e key advantage here is when dealing with content-based recommendation. is is inevitable when modeling users/items on the web, where multi-modal data is commonplace. For instance, when dealing with textual data (reviews [202], tweets [44] etc.), image data (social posts, product images), CNNs/RNNs become indispensable neural building blocks. Here, the traditional alternative (designing modality-speci c features etc.) becomes signi cantly less a ractive and consequently, the recommender system cannot take advantage of joint (end-to-end) representation learning. In some sense, developments in the eld of recommender systems are also tightly coupled with advances research in related modalities (such as vision or language communities). For example, to process reviews, one would have to perform costly preprocessing (e.g., keyphrase extraction, topic modeling etc.) whilst newer deep learning-based approaches are able to ingest all textual information end-to-end [202]. All in all, the capabilities of deep learning in this aspect can be regarded as paradigm-shi ing and the ability to represent images, text and interactions in a uni ed joint framework [197] is not possible without these recent advances.
Pertaining to the interaction-only se ing (i.e., matrix completion or collaborative ranking problem), the key idea here is that deep neural networks are justi ed when there is a huge amount of complexity or when there is a large number of training instances. In [53], the authors used a MLP to approximate the interaction function and showed reasonable performance gains over traditional methods such as MF. While these neural models perform be er, we also note that standard machine learning models such as BPR, MF and CML are known to perform reasonably well when trained with momentum-based gradient descent on interaction-only data [145]. However, we can also consider these models to be also neural architectures as well, since they take advantage of recent deep learning advances such as Adam, Dropout or Batch Normalization [53, 195]. It is also easy to see that, traditional recommender algorithms (matrix factorization, factorization machines, etc.) can also be expressed
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:6 • S. Zhang et al.
as neural/di erentiable architectures [53, 54] and trained e ciently with a framework such as Tensor ow or Pytorch, enabling e cient GPU-emabled training and free automatic di erentiation. Hence, in today’s research climate (and even industrial), there is completely no reason to not used deep learning based tools for development of any recommender system.
To recapitulate, we summarize the strengths of deep learning based recommendation models that readers might bear in mind when try to employ them for practice use.
• Nonlinear Transformation. Contrary to linear models, deep neural networks is capable of modelling the non-linearity in data with nonlinear activations such as relu, sigmoid, tanh, etc. is property makes it possible to capture the complex and intricate user item interaction pa erns. Conventional methods such as matrix factorization, factorization machine, sparse linear model are essentially linear models. For example, matrix factorization models the user-item interaction by linearly combining user and item latent factors [53]; Factorization machine is a member of multivariate linear family [54]; Obviously, SLIM is a linear regression model with sparsity constraints. e linear assumption, acting as the basis of many traditional recommenders, is oversimpli ed and will greatly limit their modelling expressiveness. It is well-established that neural networks are able to approximate any continuous function with an arbitrary precision by varying the activation choices and combinations [58, 59]. is property makes it possible to deal with complex interaction pa erns and precisely re ect user’s preference.
• Representation Learning. Deep neural networks is e cacious in learning the underlying explanatory factors and useful representations from input data. In general, a large amount of descriptive information about items and users is available in real-world applications. Making use of this information provides a way to advance our understanding of items and users, thus, resulting in a be er recommender. As such, it is a natural choice to apply deep neural networks to representation learning in recommendation models. e advantages of using deep neural networks to assist representation learning are in two-folds: (1) it reduces the e orts in hand-cra feature design. Feature engineering is a labor intensive work, deep neural networks enable automatically feature learning from raw data in unsupervised or supervised approach; (2) it enables recommendation models to include heterogeneous content information such as text, images, audio and even video. Deep learning networks have made breakthroughs in multimedia data processing and shown potentials in representations learning from various sources.
• Sequence Modelling. Deep neural networks have shown promising results on a number of sequential modelling tasks such as machine translation, natural language understanding, speech recognition, chatbots, and many others. RNN and CNN play critical roles in these tasks. RNN achives this with internal memory states while CNN achieves this with lters sliding along with time. Both of them are widely applicable and exible in mining sequential structure in data. Modelling sequential signals is an important topic for mining the temporal dynamics of user behaviour and item evolution. For example, next-item/basket prediction and session based recommendation are typical applications. As such, deep neural networks become a perfect t for this sequential pa ern mining task. is
• Flexibility. Deep learning techniques possess high exibility, especially with the advent of many popular deep learning frameworks such as Tensor ow3, Keras4, Ca e5, MXnet6, DeepLearning4j7, PyTorch8, eano9, etc. Most of these tools are developed in a modular way and have active community and
3h ps://www.tensor ow.org/ 4h ps://keras.io/ 5h p://ca e.berkeleyvision.org/ 6h ps://mxnet.apache.org/ 7h ps://deeplearning4j.org/ 8h ps://pytorch.org/ 9h p://deeplearning.net/so ware/theano/
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:7
professional support. e good modularization makes development and engineering a lot more e cient. For example, it is easy to combine di erent neural structures to formulate powerful hybrid models, or replace one module with others. us, we could easily build hybrid and composite recommendation models to simultaneously capture di erent characteristics and factors.
2.4 On Potential Limitations Are there really any drawbacks and limitations with using deep learning for recommendation? In this section, we aim to tackle several commonly cited arguments against the usage of deep learning for recommender systems research.
• Interpretability. Despite its success, deep learning is well-known to behave as black boxes, and providing explainable predictions seem to be a really challenging task. A common argument against deep neural networks is that the hidden weights and activations are generally non-interpretable, limiting explainability. However, this concern has generally been eased with the advent of neural a ention models and have paved the world for deep neural models that enjoy improved interpretability [126, 146, 178]. While interpreting individual neurons still pose a challenge for neural models (not only in recommender systems), present state-of-the-art models are already capable of some extent of interpretability, enabling explainable recommendation. We discuss this issue in more detail in the open issues section.
• Data Requirement. A second possible limitation is that deep learning is known to be data-hungry, in the sense that it requires su cient data in order to fully support its rich parameterization. However, as compared with other domains (such as language or vision) in which labeled data is scarce, it is relatively easy to garner a signi cant amount of data within the context of recommender systems research. Million/billion scale datasets are commonplace not only in industry but also released as academic datasets.
• Extensive Hyperparameter Tuning. A third well-established argument against deep learning is the need for extensive hyperparameter tuning. However, we note that hyperparameter tuning is not an exclusive problem of deep learning but machine learning in general (e.g., regularization factors and learning rate similarly have to be tuned for traditional matrix factorization etc) Granted, deep learning may introduce additional hyperparameters in some cases. For example, a recent work [145], a entive extension of the traditional metric learning algorithm [60] only introduces a single hyperparameter.
3 DEEP LEARNING BASED RECOMMENDATION: STATE-OF-THE-ART In this section, we we rstly introduce the categories of deep learning based recommendation models and then highlight state-of-the-art research prototypes, aiming to identify the most notable and promising advancement in recent years.
3.1 Categories of deep learning based recommendation models To provide a bird-eye’s view of this eld, we classify the existing models based the types of employed deep learning techniques. We further divide deep learning based recommendation models into the following two categories. Figure 1 summarizes the classi cation scheme.
• Recommendation with Neural Building Blocks. In this category, models are divided into eight subcategories in conformity with the aforementioned eight deep learning models: MLP, AE, CNNs, RNNs, RBM, NADE, AM, AN and DRL based recommender system. e deep learning technique in use determines the applicability of recommendation model. For instance, MLP can easily model the non-linear interactions between users and items; CNNs are capable of extracting local and global representations from heterogeneous
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:8 • S. Zhang et al.

Fig. 1. Categories of deep neural network based recommendation models.

Table 1. A lookup table for reviewed publications.

Categories MLP
Autoencoder
CNNs
RNNs RBM NADE Neural A ention Adversary Network DRL Hybrid Models

Publications [2, 13, 20, 27, 38, 47, 53, 54, 66, 92, 95, 157, 166, 185], [12, 39, 93, 112, 134, 154, 182, 183] [34, 88, 89, 114, 116, 125, 136, 137, 140, 159, 177, 187, 207], [4, 10, 32, 94, 150, 151, 158, 170, 171, 188, 196, 208, 209] [25, 49, 50, 75, 76, 98, 105, 127, 130, 153, 165, 172, 202, 206], [6, 44, 51, 83, 110, 126, 143, 148, 169, 190, 191] [5, 28, 35, 56, 57, 73, 78, 90, 117, 132, 139, 142, 174–176], [24, 29, 33, 55, 68, 91, 108, 113, 133, 141, 149, 173, 179] [42, 71, 72, 100, 123, 167, 180] [36, 203, 204] [14, 44, 70, 90, 99, 101, 127, 145, 169, 189, 194, 205], [62, 146, 193] [9, 52, 162, 164] [16, 21, 107, 168, 198–200] [17, 38, 41, 82, 84, 87, 118, 135, 160, 192, 193]

data sources such as textual and visual information; RNNs enable the recommender system to model the temporal dynamics and sequential evolution of content information. • Recommendation with Deep Hybrid Models. Some deep learning based recommendation models utilize more than one deep learning technique. e exibility of deep neural networks makes it possible to combine several neural building blocks together to complement one another and form a more powerful hybrid model. ere are many possible combinations of these night deep learning techniques but not all have been exploited. Note that it is di erent from the hybrid deep networks in [31] which refer to the deep architectures that make use of both generative and discriminative components.
Table 1 lists all the reviewed models, we organize them following the aforementioned classi cation scheme. Additionally, we also summarize some of the publications from the task perspective in Table 2. e reviewed publications are concerned with a variety of tasks. Some of the tasks have started to gain a ention due to use of deep neural networks such as session-based recommendation, image, video recommendations. Some of the tasks might not be novel to the recommendation research area (a detail review on the side information for recommender systems can be found in [131] ), but DL provides more possibility to nd be er solutions. For example, dealing with images and videos would be tough task without the help of deep learning techniques. e

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:9

Table 2. Deep neural network based recommendation models in specific application fields.

Data Sources/Tasks
Sequential Information
Text Images Audio Video Networks
Others

Notes
w/t User ID Session based w/o User ID Check-In, POI
Hash Tags News
Review texts otes
Visual features Music Videos
Citation Network Social Network Cross Domain
Cold-start Multitask Explainability

Publications
[16, 29, 33, 35, 73, 91, 117, 133, 143, 160, 173, 175, 189, 194, 198, 205]
[55–57, 68, 73, 99, 101, 102, 117, 142, 148, 149]
[150, 151, 165, 185] [44, 110, 118, 158, 182, 183, 193, 209] [10, 12, 113, 135, 169, 200] [11, 87, 126, 146, 174, 197, 202] [82, 141] [2, 14, 25, 49, 50, 84, 98, 105, 112, 165, 172, 179, 191, 192, 197, 206] [95, 153, 167, 168] [14, 17, 27, 83] [9, 38, 66] [32, 116, 166] [39, 92, 166] [154, 156, 170, 171] [5, 73, 87, 174, 187] [87, 126]

sequence modelling capability of deep neural networks makes it easy to capture the sequential pa erns of user behaviors. Some of the speci c tasks will be discussed in the following text.

3.2 Multilayer Perceptron based Recommendation

MLP is a concise but e ective network which has been demonstrated to be able to approximate any measurable function to any desired degree of accuracy [59]. As such, it is the basis of numerous advanced approaches and is widely used in many areas.

Neural Extension of Traditional Recommendation Methods. Many existing recommendation models are

essentially linear methods. MLP can be used to add nonlinear transformation to existing RS approaches and

interpret them into neural extensions.

Neural Collaborative Filtering. In most cases, recommendation is deemed to be a two-way interaction between

users preferences and items features. For example, matrix factorization decomposes the rating matrix into

low-dimensional user/item latent factors. It is natural to construct a dual neural network to model the two-way

interaction between users and items. Neural Network Matrix Factorization (NNMF) [37] and Neural Collaborative

Filtering

(NCF)

[53]

are

two

representative

works.

Figure

2a

shows

the

NCF

architecture.

Let

suser
u

and

sitem
i

denote the side information (e.g. user pro les and item features), or just one-hot identi er of user u and item i.

e scoring function is de ned as follows:

rˆui

=

f

(U T

· suser ,VT
u

·

s

i i

t

e

m

|U

,

V

,

θ

)

(1)

where function f (·) represents the multilayer perceptron, and θ is the parameters of this network. Traditional MF can be viewed as a special case of NCF. erefore, it is convenient to fuse the neural interpretation of matrix factorization with MLP to formulate a more general model which makes use of both linearity of MF and non-linearity of MLP to enhance recommendation quality. e whole network can be trained with weighted

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:10 • S. Zhang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Illustration of: (a) Neural Collaborative Filtering; (b) Deep Factorization Machine.

square loss (for explicit feedback) or binary cross-entropy loss (for implicit feedback). e cross-entropy loss is

de ned as:

L=−

rui log rˆui + (1 − rui ) log(1 − rˆui )

(2)

(u, i ) ∈O∪O−

Negative sampling approaches can be used to reduce the number of training unobserved instances. Follow-up

work [112, 134] proposed using pairwise ranking loss to enhance the performance. He et al. [92, 166] extended

the NCF model to cross-domain recommendations. Xue et al. [184] and Zhang et al. [195] showed that the one-hot

identi er can be replaced with columns or rows of the interaction matrix to retain the user-item interaction

pa erns. Deep Factorization Machine. DeepFM [47] is an end-to-end model which seamlessly integrates factorization

machine and MLP. It is able to model the high-order feature interactions via deep neural network and low-

order interactions with factorization machine. Factorization machine (FM) utilizes addition and inner product

operations to capture the linear and pairwise interactions between features (refer to Equation (1) in [119] for

more details). MLP leverages the non-linear activations and deep structure to model the high-order interactions.

e way of combining MLP with FM is enlightened by wide & deep network. It replaces the wide component

with a neural interpretation of factorization machine. Compared to wide & deep model, DeepFM does not require

tedious feature engineering. Figure 2b illustrates the structure of DeepFM. e input of DeepFM x is an m- elds

data consisting of pairs (u, i) (identity and features of user and item). For simplicity, the outputs of FM and MLP

are denoted as F M (x) and MLP (x) respectively. e prediction score is calculated by:

rˆui = σ ( F M (x) + MLP (x))

(3)

where σ (·) is the sigmoid activation function. Lian et al. [93] improved DeepMF by proposing a eXtreme deep factorization machine to jointly model the
explicit and implicit feature interactions. e explicit high-order feature interactions are learned via a compressed interaction network. A parallel work proposed by He et al. [54] replaces the second-order interactions with MLP and proposed regularizing the model with dropout and batch normalization.

Feature Representation Learning with MLP. Using MLP for feature representation is very straightforward
and highly e cient, even though it might not be as expressive as autoencoder, CNNs and RNNs. Wide & Deep Learning. is general model (shown in Figure 3a) can solve both regression and classi cation
problems, but initially introduced for App recommendation in Google play [20]. e wide learning component
is a single layer perceptron which can also be regarded as a generalized linear model. e deep learning

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:11

component is multilayer perceptron. e rationale of combining these two learning techniques is that it enables

the recommender to capture both memorization and generalization. Memorization achieved by the wide learning

component represents the capability of catching the direct features from historical data. Meanwhile, the deep

learning component catches the generalization by producing more general and abstract representations. is

model can improve the accuracy as well as the diversity of recommendation.

Formally, the wide learning is de ned as:

=

WT
wide

{x ,

ϕ (x )}

+

b,

where

WT ,
wide

b

are

the

model

parameters.

e input {x, ϕ(x)} is the concatenated feature set consisting of raw input feature x and transformed (e.g. cross-

product transformation to capture the correlations between features) feature ϕ(x). Each layer of the deep neural component is in the form of α (l+1) = f (Wdeep (l) a(l) + b(l)), where l indicates the lth layer, and f (·) is the activation function. W (l) deep and b(l) are weight and bias terms. e wide & deep learning model is a ained by fusing these

two models:

P (rˆui

=

1|x )

=

σ (WwTide {x, ϕ(x)}

+ W T a(lf )
deep

+ bias)

(4)

where σ (·) is the sigmoid function, rˆui is the binary rating label, a(lf ) is the nal activation. is joint model is

optimized with stochastic back-propagation ( follow-the-regularized-leader algorithm). Recommending list is

generated based on the predicted scores.

By extending this model, Chen et al. [13] devised a locally-connected wide & deep learning model for large

scale industrial-level recommendation task. It employs the e cient locally-connected network to replace the

deep learning component, which decreases the running time by one order of magnitude. An important step of

deploying wide & deep learning is selecting features for wide and deep parts. In other word, the system should

be able to determine which features are memorized or generalized. Moreover, the cross-product transformation

also is required to be manually designed. ese pre-steps will greatly in uence the utility of this model. e

above mentioned deep factorization based model can alleviate the e ort in feature engineering.

Covington et al. [27] explored applying MLP in YouTube recommendation. is system divides the recom-

mendation task into two stages: candidate generation and candidate ranking. e candidate generation network

retrieves a subset (hundreds) from all video corpus. e ranking network generates a top-n list (dozens) based on

the nearest neighbors scores from the candidates. We notice that the industrial world cares more about feature

engineering (e.g. transformation, normalization, crossing) and scalability of recommendation models.

Alashkar et al. [2] proposed a MLP based model for makeup recommendation. is work uses two identical

MLPs to model labeled examples and expert rules respectively. Parameters of these two networks are updated

simultaneously by minimizing the di erences between their outputs. It demonstrates the e cacy of adopting

expert knowledge to guide the learning process of the recommendation model in a MLP framework. It is highly

precise even though the expertise acquisition needs a lot of human involvements.

Collaborative Metric Learning (CML). CML [60] replaces the dot product of MF with Euclidean distance because

dot product does not satisfy the triangle inequality of distance function. e user and item embeddings are

learned via maximizing the distance between users and their disliked items and minimizing that between users

and their preferred items. In CML, MLP is used to learn representations from item features such as text, images

and tags.

Recommendation with Deep Structured Semantic Model. Deep Structured Semantic Model (DSSM) [65] is a deep neural network for learning semantic representations of entities in a common continuous semantic space and measuring their semantic similarities. It is widely used in information retrieval area and is supremely suitable for top-n recommendation [39, 182]. DSSM projects di erent entities into a common low-dimensional space, and computes their similarities with cosine function. Basic DSSM is made up of MLP so we put it in this section. Note that, more advanced neural layers such as convolution and max-pooling layers can also be easily integrated into DSSM.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:12 • S. Zhang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. Illustration of: (a) Wide & Deep Learning; (b) Multi-View Deep Neural Network.

Deep Semantic Similarity based Personalized Recommendation (DSPR) [182] is a tag-aware personalized recommender where each user xu and item xi are represented by tag annotations and mapped into a common tag space. Cosine similarity sim(u, i) are applied to decide the relevance of items and users (or user’s preference over
the item). e loss function of DSPR is de ned as follows:

L = − [lo (esim(u,i∗)) − lo (

e s i m (u, i − ) )]

(5)

(u, i ∗)

(u, i − ) ∈D −

where (u, i−) are negative samples which are randomly sampled from the negative user item pairs. e au-

thors. [183] further improved DSPR using autoencoder to learn low-dimensional representations from user/item

pro les.

Multi-View Deep Neural Network (MV-DNN) [39] is designed for cross domain recommendation. It treats users

as the pivot view and each domain (suppose we have Z domains) as auxiliary view. Apparently, there are Z

similarity scores for Z user-domain pairs. Figure 3b illustrates the structure of MV-DNN. e loss function of

MV-DNN is de ned as:

Z exp(γ · cosine(Yu , Ya, j ))

L = ar min

(6)

θ j=1 X ∈Rda exp(γ · cosine(Yu , fa (X )))

where θ is the model parameters, γ is the smoothing factor, Yu is the output of user view, a is the index of active view. Rda is the input domain of view a. MV-DNN is capable of scaling up to many domains. However, it is based on the hypothesis that users have similar tastes in one domain should have similar tastes in other domains. Intuitively, this assumption might be unreasonable in many cases. erefore, we should have some preliminary knowledge on the correlations across di erent domains to make the most of MV-DNN.

3.3 Autoencoder based Recommendation
ere exist two general ways of applying autoencoder to recommender system: (1) using autoencoder to learn lower-dimensional feature representations at the bo leneck layer; or (2) lling the blanks of the interaction matrix directly in the reconstruction layer. Almost all the autoencoder variants such as denoising autoencoder, variational autoencoder, contactive autoencoder and marginalized autoencoder can be applied to recommendation task. Table 3 summarizes the recommendation models based on the types of autoencoder in use.
Autoencoder based Collaborative Filtering. One of the successful application is to consider the collaborative ltering from Autoencoder perspective. AutoRec [125] takes user partial vectors r(u) or item partial vectors r(i) as input, and aims to reconstruct them
in the output layer. Apparently, it has two variants: item-based AutoRec (I-AutoRec) and user-based AutoRec

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:13

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. Illustration of: (a) Item based AutoRec; (b) Collaborative denoising autoencoder; (c) Deep collaborative filtering framework.
Table 3. Summary of four autoencoder based recommendation models

Vanilla/Denoising AE [114, 125, 136, 137, 159, 177]
[70, 116, 170, 171, 188]

Variational AE [19, 89, 94]

Contractive AE [196]

Marginalized AE [88]

(U-AutoRec), corresponding to the two types of inputs. Here, we only introduce I-AutoRec, while U-AutoRec can be easily derived accordingly. Figure 4a illustrates the structure of I-AutoRec. Given input r(i), the reconstruction is: h(r(i); θ ) = f (W · (V · r(i) + µ) +b), where f (·) and (·) are the activation functions, parameter θ = {W , V , µ, b}.
e objective function of I-AutoRec is formulated as follows:

N

ar min

r(i) − h(r(i); θ ) 2O +λ · reg

(7)

θ i=1

Here

·

2 O

means

that

it

only

considers

observed

ratings.

e objective function can be optimized by resilient

propagation (converges faster and produces comparable results) or L-BFGS (Limited-memory Broyden Fletcher

Goldfarb Shanno algorithm). ere are four important points about AutoRec that worth noticing before deploy-

ment: (1) I-AutoRec performs be er than U-AutoRec, which may be due to the higher variance of user partially

observed vectors. (2) Di erent combination of activation functions f (·) and (·) will in uence the performance

considerably. (3) Increasing the hidden unit size moderately will improve the result as expanding the hidden

layer dimensionality gives AutoRec more capacity to model the characteristics of the input. (4) Adding more

layers to formulate a deep network can lead to slightly improvement.

CFN [136, 137] is an extension of AutoRec, and posses the following two advantages: (1) it deploys the denoising

techniques, which makes CFN more robust; (2) it incorporates the side information such as user pro les and item

descriptions to mitigate the sparsity and cold start in uence. e input of CFN is also partial observed vectors, so it also has two variants: I-CFN and U-CFN, taking r(i) and r(u) as input respectively. Masking noise is imposed as

a strong regularizer to be er deal with missing elements (their values are zero). e authors introduced three

widely used corruption approaches to corrupt the input: Gaussian noise, masking noise and salt-and-pepper

noise. Further extension of CFN also incorporates side information. However, instead of just integrating side

information in the rst layer, CFN injects side information in every layer. us, the reconstruction becomes:

h({r˜(i), si }) = f (W2 · { (W1 · {r(i), si } + µ), si } + b)

(8)

where si is side information, {r˜(i), si } indicates the concatenation of r˜(i) and si . Incorporating side information improves the prediction accuracy, speeds up the training process and enables the model to be more robust.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:14 • S. Zhang et al.

Collaborative Denoising Auto-Encoder (CDAE). e three models reviewed earlier are mainly designed for rating
prediction, while CDAE [177] is principally used for ranking prediction. e input of CDAE is user partially observed implicit feedback rpref (u) . e entry value is 1 if the user likes the movie, otherwise 0. It can also be regarded as a preference vector which re ects user’s interests to items. Figure 4b illustrates the structure of CDAE. e input of CDAE is corrupted by Gaussian noise. e corrupted input r˜pref (u) is drawn from a conditional Gaussian distribution p(r˜pref (u) |rpref (u) ). e reconstruction is de ned as:

h(r˜pr ef (u) ) = f (W2 · (W1 · r˜pr ef (u) + Vu + b1) + b2) (9)

where Vu ∈ RK denotes the weight matrix for user node (see gure 4b). is weight matrix is unique for each user

and has signi cant in uence on the model performance. Parameters of CDAE are also learned by minimizing the

reconstruction error: M

ar min 1 Ep(r˜(u) |r(u) )[ (r˜pr ef (u) , h(r˜pr ef (u) ))] + λ · reg (10)

W1,W2,V ,b1,b2 M u=1

pref pref

where the loss function (·) can be square loss or logistic loss. CDAE initially updates its parameters using SGD over all feedback. However, the authors argued that it is
impractical to take all ratings into consideration in real world applications, so they proposed a negative sampling technique to sample a small subset from the negative set (items with which the user has not interacted), which reduces the time complexity substantially without degrading the ranking quality.
Muli-VAE and Multi-DAE [94] proposed a variant of varitional autoencoder for recommendation with implicit data, showing be er performance than CDAE. e authors introduced a principled Bayesian inference approach for parameters estimation and show favorable results than commonly used likelihood functions.
To the extent of our knowledge, Autoencoder-based Collaborative Filtering (ACF) [114] is the rst autoencoder based collaborative recommendation model. Instead of using the original partial observed vectors, it decomposes them by integer ratings. For example, if the rating score is integer in the range of [1-5], each r(i) will be divided into ve partial vectors. Similar to AutoRec and CFN, the cost function of ACF aims at reducing the mean squared error. However, there are two demerits of ACF: (1) it fails to deal with non-integer ratings; (2) the decomposition of partial observed vectors increases the sparseness of input data and leads to worse prediction accuracy.

Feature Representation Learning with Autoencoder. Autoencoder is a class of powerful feature representa-

tion learning approach. As such, it can also be used in recommender systems to learn feature representations

from user/item content features.

Collaborative Deep Learning (CDL). CDL [159] is a hierarchical Bayesian model which integrates stacked

denoising autoencoder (SDAE) into probabilistic matrix factorization. To seamlessly combine deep learning and

recommendation model, the authors proposed a general Bayesian deep learning framework [161] consisting

of two tightly hinged components: perception component (deep neural network) and task-speci c component.

Speci cally, the perception component of CDL is a probabilistic interpretation of ordinal SDAE, and PMF acts as

the task-speci c component. is tight combination enables CDL to balance the in uences of side information

and interaction history. e generative process of CDL is as follows:

(1) For each layer l of the SDAE: (a) For each column n of weight matrix Wl , draw Wl,∗n ∼ N(0, λw−1IDl ); (b)

Draw the bias vector bl

∼

N

(

0,

λ

−1 w

I

D

l

)

;

(c) For each row i

of Xl , draw Xl,i∗

∼

N(σ (Xl−1,i∗Wl

+

b

l

),

λ

− s

1

I

D

l

)

.

(2)

For each item i:

(a) Draw a clean input Xc,i∗

∼

N

(X

L,

i

∗

,

λ

− n

1

I

I

i

)

;

(b)

Draw

a

latent

o

set vector ϵi

∼

N(0, λ−1ID )

and

set

the

latent

item

vector:

Vi

=

ϵi

+

X

T
L

.

2 ,i∗

(3) Draw a latent user vector for each user u, Uu ∼ N(0, λu−1ID ).

(4)

Draw a rating rui

for each user-item pair (u, i), rui

∼

N(UuT

Vi

,

C −1 ).
ui

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:15

Fig. 5. Graphical model of collaborative deep learning (le ) and collaborative deep ranking (right).

where Wl and bl are the weight matrix and biases vector for layer l, Xl represents layer l. λw , λs , λn, λ , λu are

hyper-parameters, Cui is a con dence parameter for determining the con dence to observations [63]. Figure 5(le )

illustrates the graphical model of CDL. e authors exploited an EM-style algorithm to learn the parameters. In

each iteration, it updates U and V rst, and then updates W and b by xing U and V . e authors also introduced

a sampling-based algorithm [161] to avoid the local optimum.

Before CDL, Wang et al. [158] proposed a similar model, relational stacked denoising autoencoders (RSDAE),

for tag recommendation. e di erence of CDL and RSDAE is that RSDAE replaces the PMF with a relational

information matrix. Another extension of CDL is collaborative variational autoencoder (CVAE) [89], which

replaces the deep neural component of CDL with a variational autoencoder. CVAE learns probabilistic latent

variables for content information and can easily incorporate multimedia (video, images) data sources.

Collaborative Deep Ranking (CDR). CDR [188] is devised speci cally in a pairwise framework for top-n

recommendation. Some studies have demonstrated that pairwise model is more suitable for ranking lists

generation [120, 177, 188]. Experimental results also show that CDR outperforms CDL in terms of ranking

prediction. Figure 5(right) presents the structure of CDR. e rst and second generative process steps of CDR

are the same as CDL. e third and fourth steps are replaced by the following step:

• For each user u: (a) Draw a latent user vector for u, Uu ∼ N(0, λu−1ID ); (b) For each pair-wise preference

(i, j)

∈

Pi ,

where

Pi

=

{(i, j)

:

rui

− ruj

>

0},

draw

the

estimator, δuij

∼

N(UuT Vi

−

UT
u

Vj

,

C

−1 uij

).

where δuij

=

rui

− ruj

represents the pairwise relationship of user’s preference on item i

and

item

j,

C −1
uij

is

a con dence value which indicates how much user u prefers item i than item j. e optimization process is

performed in the same manner as CDL.

Deep Collaborative Filtering Framework. It is a general framework for unifying deep learning approaches with

collaborative ltering model [88]. is framework makes it easily to utilize deep feature learning techniques to

build hybrid collaborative models. e aforementioned work such as [153, 159, 167] can be viewed as special

cases of this general framework. Formally, the deep collaborative ltering framework is de ned as follows:

arg min (R, U , V ) + β( U

2
F+

V

2 F

)

+

γ

L(X

,

U

)

+

δ

L(Y

,

V

)

(11)

U ,V

where β, γ and δ are trade-o parameters to balance the in uences of these three components, X and Y are side information, (·) is the loss of collaborative ltering model. L(X , U ) and L(Y , V ) act as hinges for connecting deep learning and collaborative models and link side information with latent factors. On top of this framework, the authors proposed the marginalized denoising autoencoder based collaborative ltering model (mDA-CF). Compared to CDL, mDA-CF explores a more computationally e cient variants of autoencoder: marginalized denoising autoencoder [15]. It saves the computational costs for searching su cient corrupted version of input

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:16 • S. Zhang et al.
by marginalizing out the corrupted input, which makes mDA-CF more scalable than CDL. In addition, mDA-CF embeds content information of items and users while CDL only considers the e ects of item features.
AutoSVD++ [196] makes use of contractive autoencoder [122] to learn item feature representations, then integrates them into the classic recommendation model, SVD++ [79]. e proposed model posses the following advantages: (1) compared to other autoencoders variants, contractive autoencoder captures the in nitesimal input variations; (2) it models the implicit feedback to further enhance the accuracy; (3) an e cient training algorithm is designed to reduce the training time.
HRCD [170, 171] is a hybrid collaborative model based on autoencoder and timeSVD++ [80]. It is a time-aware model which uses SDAE to learn item representations from raw features and aims at solving the cold item problem.
3.4 Convolutional Neural Networks based Recommendation
Convolution Neural Networks are powerful in processing unstructured multimedia data with convolution and pool operations. Most of the CNNs based recommendation models utilize CNNs for feature extraction.
Feature Representation Learning with CNNs. CNNs can be used for feature representation learning from multiple sources such as image, text, audio, video, etc.
CNNs for Image Feature Extraction. Wang et al. [165] investigated the in uences of visual features to Pointof-Interest (POI) recommendation, and proposed a visual content enhanced POI recommender system (VPOI). VPOI adopts CNNs to extract image features. e recommendation model is built on PMF by exploring the interactions between: (1) visual content and latent user factor; (2) visual content and latent location factor. Chu et al. [25] exploited the e ectiveness of visual information (e.g. images of food and furnishings of the restaurant) in restaurant recommendation. e visual features extracted by CNN joint with the text representation are input into MF, BPRMF and FM to test their performance. Results show that visual information improves the performance to some degree but not signi cant. He et al. [50] designed a visual Bayesian personalized ranking (VBPR) algorithm by incorporating visual features (learned via CNNs) into matrix factorization. He et al. [49] extended VBPR with exploring user’s fashion awareness and the evolution of visual factors that user considers when selecting items. Yu et al. [191] proposed a coupled matrix and tensor factorization model for aesthetic-based clothing recommendation, in which CNNs is used to learn the images features and aesthetic features. Nguyen et al. [110] proposed a personalized tag recommendation model based on CNNs. It utilizes the convolutional and max-pooling layer to get visual features from patches of images. User information is injected for generating personalized recommendation. To optimize this network, the BPR objective is adopted to maximize the di erences between the relevant and irrelevant tags. Lei et al. [84] proposed a comparative deep leaning model with CNNs for image recommendation. is network consists of two CNNs which are used for image representation learning and a MLP for user preferences modelling. It compares two images (one positive image user likes and one negative image user dislikes) against a user. e training data is made up of triplets: t (user Ut , positive image It+, negative image It−). Assuming that the distance between user and positive image D(π (Ut ), ϕ(It+)) should be closer than the distance between user and negative images D(π (Ut ), ϕ(It−)), where D(·) is the distance metric (e.g. Euclidean distance). ConTagNet [118] is a context-aware tag recommender system. e image features are learned by CNNs. e context representations are processed by a two layers fully-connected feedforward neural network.
e outputs of two neural networks are concatenated and fed into a so max funcation to predict the probability of candidate tags.
CNNs for Text Feature Extraction. DeepCoNN [202] adopts two parallel CNNs to model user behaviors and item properties from review texts. is model alleviates the sparsity problem and enhances the model interpretability by exploiting rich semantic representations of review texts with CNNs. It utilizes a word embedding technique to map the review texts into a lower-dimensional semantic space as well as keep the words sequences information.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:17
e extracted review representations then pass through a convolutional layer with di erent kernels, a maxpooling layer, and a full-connected layer consecutively. e output of the user network xu and item network xi are nally concatenated as the input of the prediction layer where the factorization machine is applied to capture their interactions for rating prediction. Catherine et al. [11] mentioned that DeepCoNN only works well when the review text wri en by the target user for the target item is available at test time, which is unreasonable. As such, they extended it by introducing a latent layer to represent the target user-target-item pair. is model does not access the reviews during validation/test and can still remain good accuracy. Shen et al. [130] built an e-learning resources recommendation model. It uses CNNs to extract item features from text information of learning resources such as introduction and content of learning material, and follows the same procedure of [153] to perform recommendation. ConvMF [75] combines CNNs with PMF in a similar way as CDL. CDL uses autoencoder to learn the item feature representations, while ConvMF employs CNNs to learn high level item representations. e main advantage of ConvMF over CDL is that CNNs is able to capture more accurate contextual information of items via word embedding and convolutional kernels. Tuan et al. [148] proposed using CNNs to learn feature representations form item content information (e.g., name, descriptions, identi er and category) to enhance the accuracy of session based recommendation.
CNNs for Audio and Video Feature Extraction. Van et al. [153] proposed using CNNs to extract features from music signals. e convolutional kernels and pooling layers allow operations at multiple timescales. is contentbased model can alleviate the cold start problem (music has not been consumed) of music recommendation. Lee et al. [83] proposed extracting audio features with the prominent CNNs model ResNet. e recommendation is performed in the collaborative metric learning framework similar to CML.
CNNs based Collaborative ltering. Directly applying CNNs to vanilla collaborative ltering is also viable. For example, He et al. [51] proposed using CNNs to improve NCF and presented the ConvNCF. It uses outer product instead of dot product to model the user item interaction pa erns. CNNs are applied over the result of outer product and could capture the high-order correlations among embeddings dimensions. Tang et al. [143] presented sequential recommendation (with user identi er) with CNNs, where two CNNs (hierarchical and vertical) are used to model the union-level sequential pa erns and skip behaviors for sequence-aware recommendation.
Graph CNNs for Recommendation. Graph convolutional Networks is a powerful tool for non-Eulcidean data such as: social networks, knowledge graphs, protein-interaction networks, etc [77]. Interactions in recommendation area can also be viewed as a such structured dataset (bipartite graph). us, it can also be applied to recommendation tasks. For example, Berg et al. [6] proposed considering the recommendation problem as a link prediction task with graph CNNs. is framework makes it easy to integrate user/item side information such as social networks and item relationships into recommendation model. Ying et al. [190] proposed using graph CNNs for recommendations in Pinterest10. is model generates item embeddings from both graph structure as well item feature information with random walk and graph CNNs, and is suitable for very large-scale web recommender.
e proposed model has been deployed in Pinterest to address a variety of real-world recommendation tasks.
3.5 Recurrent Neural Networks based Recommendation
RNNs are extremely suitable for sequential data processing. As such, it becomes a natural choice for dealing with the temporal dynamics of interactions and sequential pa erns of user behaviours, as well as side information with sequential signals, such as texts, audio, etc.
Session-based Recommendation without User Identi er. In many real world applications or websites, the system usually does not bother users to log in so that it has no access to user’s identi er and her long period consumption habits or long-term interests. However, the session or cookie mechanisms enables those systems to
10h ps://www.pinterest.com
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:18 • S. Zhang et al.

get user’s short term preferences. is is a relatively unappreciated task in recommender systems due to the

extreme sparsity of training data. Recent advancements have demonstrated the e cacy of RNNs in solving this

issue [56, 142, 176]. GRU4Rec. Hidasi et al. [56] proposed a session-based recommendation model, GRU4Rec, based GRU (shown in

Figure 6a). e input is the actual state of session with 1-of-N encoding, where N is the number of items. e

coordinate will be 1 if the corresponding item is active in this session, otherwise 0. e output is the likelihood of

being the next in the session for each item. To e ciently train the proposed framework, the authors proposed a

session-parallel mini-batches algorithm and a sampling method for output. e ranking loss which is also coined

TOP1 and has the following form:

1 2 S

Ls =

σ (rˆs j − rˆsi ) + σ (rˆs j )

(12)

S j=1

where S is the sample size, rˆsi and rˆsj are the scores on negative item i and positive item j at session s, σ is the

logistic sigmoid function. e last term is used as a regularization. Note that, BPR loss is also viable. A recent

work [55] found that the original TOP1 loss and BPR loss de ned in [56] su er from the gradient vanishing

problem, as such, two novel loss functions: TOP1-max and BPR-max are proposed.

e follow-up work [142] proposed several strategies to further improve this model: (1) augment the click

sequences with sequence preprocessing and dropout regularization; (2) adapt to temporal changes by pre-training

with full training data and ne-tuning the model with more recent click-sequences; (3) distillation the model with privileged information with a teacher model; (4) using item embedding to decrease the number of parameters for

faster computation.

Wu et al. [176] designed a session-based recommendation model for real-world e-commerce website. It utilizes

the basic RNNs to predict what user will buy next based on the click history. To minimize the computation costs,

it only keeps a nite number of the latest states while collapsing the older states into a single history state. is

method helps to balance the trade-o between computation costs and prediction accuracy. adrana et al. [117]

presented a hierarchical recurrent neural network for session-based recommendation. is model can deal with

both session-aware recommendation when user identi ers are present.

e aforementioned three session-based models do not consider any side information. Two extensions [57,

132] demonstrate that side information has e ect on enhancing session recommendation quality. Hidasi et

al. [57] introduced a parallel architecture for session-based recommendation which utilizes three GRUs to learn

representations from identity one-hot vectors, image feature vectors and text feature vectors. e outputs of

these three GRUs are weightedly concatenated and fed into a non-linear activation to predict the next items

in that session. Smirnova et al. [132] proposed a context-aware session-based recommender system based on

conditional RNNs. It injects context information into input and output layers. Experimental results of these two

models suggest that models incorporated additional information outperform those solely based on historical

interactions.

Despite the success of RNNs in session-based recommendation, Jannach et al. [68] indicated that simple

neighbourhood approach could achieve same accuracy results as GRU4Rec. Combining the neighbourhood with

RNNs methods can usually lead to best performance. is work suggests that some baselines in recent works are

not well-justi ed and correctly evaluated. A more comprehensive discussion can be found in [103].

Sequential Recommendation with User Identi er. Unlike session-based recommender where user identi ers
are usually not present. e following studies deal with the sequential recommendation task with known user
identi cations. Recurrent Recommender Network (RRN) [175] is a non-parametric recommendation model built on RNNs (shown
in Figure 6b). It is capable of modelling the seasonal evolution of items and changes of user preferences over time. RRN uses two LSTM networks as the building block to model dynamic user state uut and item state it . In the

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:19

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 6. Illustration of: (a) Session-based recommendation with RNN; (b) Recurrent recommender network; (c) Restricted Boltzmann Machine based Collaborative Filtering.

meantime, considering the xed properties such as user long-term interests and item static features, the model

also incorporates the stationary latent a ributes of user and item: uu and i . e predicted rating of item j given

by user i at time t is de ned as:

rˆui |t = f (uut , it , uu , i )

(13)

where uut and it are learned from LSTM, uu and i are learned by the standard matrix factorization. e

optimization is to minimize the square error between predicted and actual rating values.

Wu et al. [174] further improved the RRNs model by modelling text reviews and ratings simultaneously. Unlike

most text review enhanced recommendation models [127, 202], this model aims to generate reviews with a

character-level LSTM network with user and item latent states. e review generation task can be viewed as an

auxiliary task to facilitate rating prediction. is model is able to improve the rating prediction accuracy, but

cannot generate coherent and readable review texts. NRT [87] which will be introduced in the following text can

generate readable review tips. Jing et al. [73] proposed a multi-task learning framework to simultaneously predict

the returning time of users and recommend items. e returning time prediction is motivated by a survival

analysis model designed for estimating the probability of survival of patients. e authors modi ed this model

by using LSTM to estimate the returning time of costumers. e item recommendation is also performed via

LSTM from user’s past session actions. Unlike aforementioned session-based recommendations which focus on

recommending in the same session, this model aims to provide inter-session recommendations. Li et al. [91]

presented a behavior-intensive model for sequential recommendation. is model consists of two components:

neural item embedding and discriminative behaviors learning. e la er part is made up of two LSTMs for

session and preference behaviors learning respectively. Christakopoulou et al. [24] designed an interactive

recommender with RNNs. e proposed framework aims to address two critical tasks in interactive recommender:

ask and respond. RNNs are used to tackle both tasks: predict questions that the user might ask based on her

recent behaviors(e.g, watch event) and predict the responses. Donkers et al. [35] designed a novel type of Gated

Recurrent Unit to explicit represent individual user for next item recommendation.

Feature Representation Learning with RNNs. For side information with sequential pa erns, using RNNs as the representation learning tool is an advisable choice.
Dai et al. [29] presented a co-evolutionary latent model to capture the co-evolution nature of users’ and items’ latent features. e interactions between users and items play an important role in driving the changes

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:20 • S. Zhang et al.

of user preferences and item status. To model the historical interactions, the author proposed using RNNs to automatically learn representations of the in uences from dri , evolution and co-evolution of user and item features.
Bansal et al. [5] proposed using GRUs to encode the text sequences into latent factor model. is hybrid model solves both warm-start and cold-start problems. Furthermore, the authors adopted a multi-task regularizer to prevent over ing and alleviate the sparsity of training data. e main task is rating prediction while the auxiliary task is item meta-data (e.g. tags, genres) prediction.
Okura et al. [113] proposed using GRUs to learn more expressive aggregation for user browsing history (browsed news), and recommend news articles with latent factor model. e results show a signi cant improvement compared with the traditional word-based approach. e system has been fully deployed to online production services and serving over ten million unique users everyday.
Li et al. [87] presented a multitask learning framework, NRT, for predicting ratings as well as generating textual tips for users simultaneously. e generated tips provide concise suggestions and anticipate user’s experience and feelings on certain products. e rating prediction task is modelled by non-linear layers over item and user latent factors U ∈ Rku ×M , V ∈ Rk ×M , where ku and k (not necessarily equal) are latent factor dimensions for users and items. e predicted rating rui and two latent factor matrices are fed into a GRU for tips generation. Here, rui is used as context information to decide the sentiment of the generated tips. e multi-task learning framework enables the whole model to be trained e ciently in an end-to-end paradigm.
Song et al. [135] designed a temporal DSSM model which integrates RNNs into DSSM for recommendation. Based on traditional DSSM, TDSSM replace the le network with item static features, and the right network with two sub-networks to modelling user static features (with MLP) and user temporal features (with RNNs).

3.6 Restricted Boltzmann Machine based Recommendation

Salakhutdinov et al. [123] proposed a restricted Boltzmann machine based recommender (shown in Figure 6c).

To the best of our knowledge, it is the rst recommendation model that built on neural networks. e visible unit

of RBM is limited to binary values, therefore, the rating score is represented in a one-hot vector to adapt to this

restriction. For example, [0,0,0,1,0] represents that the user gives a rating score 4 to this item. Let hj , j = 1, ..., F

denote the hidden units with xed size F . Each user has a unique RBM with shared parameters. Suppose a user

rated m movies, the number of visible units is m, Let X be a K × m matrix where xi = 1 if user u rated movie i as

and xi = 0 otherwise. en:

exp(bi +

F
j=1 hjWi j )

mK

p( i = 1|h) = K

l

F

l , p(hj = 1|X ) = σ (bj +

xi Wij )

(14)

l=1 exp(bi + j=1 hjWi j )

i=1 =1

where Wij represents the weight on the connection between the rating of movie i and the hidden unit j, bi is the bias of rating for movie i, bj is the bias of hidden unit j. RBM is not tractable, but the parameters can be learned via the Contrastive Divergence (CD) algorithm [45]. e authors further proposed using a conditional RBM to incorporate the implicit feedback. e essence here is that users implicitly tell their preferences by giving ratings, regardless of how they rate items.
e above RBM-CF is user-based where a given user’s rating is clamped on the visible layer. Similarity, we can easily design an item-based RBM-CF if we clamp a given item’s rating on the visible layer. Georgiev et al. [42] proposed to combine the user-based and item-based RBM-CF in a uni ed framework. In the case, the visible units are determined both by user and item hidden units. Liu et al. [100] designed a hybrid RBM-CF which incorporates item features (item categories). is model is also based on conditional RBM. ere are two di erences between this hybrid model with the conditional RBM-CF with implicit feedback: (1) the conditional layer here is modelled

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:21

Table 4. Categories of neural a ention based recommendation models.

Vanilla A ention

Co-A ention

[14, 44, 70, 90, 99, 101, 127, 145, 169, 189] [62, 146, 193, 194, 205]

with the binary item genres; (2) the conditional layer a ects both the hidden layer and the visible layer with di erent connected weights.
3.7 Neural A ention based Recommendation
A ention mechanism is motivated by human visual a ention. For example, people only need to focus on speci c parts of the visual inputs to understand or recognize them. A ention mechanism is capable of ltering out the uninformative features from raw inputs and reduce the side e ects of noisy data. It is an intuitive but e ective technique and has garnered considerable a ention over the recent years across areas such as computer vision [3], natural language processing [104, 155] and speech recognition [22, 23]. Neural a ention can not only used in conjunction with MLP, CNNs and RNNs, but also address some tasks independently [155]. Integrating a ention mechanism into RNNs enables the RNNs to process long and noisy inputs [23]. Although LSTM can solve the long memory problem theoretically, it is still problematic when dealing with long-range dependencies. A ention mechanism provides a be er solution and helps the network to be er memorize inputs. A ention-based CNNs are capable of capturing the most informative elements of the inputs [127]. By applying a ention mechanism to recommender system, one could leverage a ention mechanism to lter out uninformative content and select the most representative items [14] while providing good interpretability. Although neural a ention mechanism is not exactly a standalone deep neural technique, it is still worthwhile to discuss it separately due to its widespread use.
A ention model learns to a end to the input with a ention scores. Calculating the a ention scores lives at the heart of neural a ention models. Based on the way for calculating the a ention scores, we classify the neural a ention models into (1) standard vanilla a ention and (2) co-a ention. Vanilla a ention utilizes a parameterized context vector to learn to a end while co-a ention is concerned with learning a ention weights from two-sequences. Self-a ention is a special case of co-a ention. Recent works [14, 44, 127] demonstrate the capability of a ention mechanism in enhancing recommendation performance. Table 4 summarizes the a ention based recommendation models.
Recommendation with Vanilla Attention Chen et al. [14] proposed an a entive collaborative ltering model by introducing a two-level a ention
mechanism to latent factor model. It consists of item-level and component-level a ention. e item-level a ention is used to select the most representative items to characterize users. e component-level a ention aims to capture the most informative features from multimedia auxiliary information for each user. Tay et al. [145] proposed a memory-based a ention for collaborative metric learning. It introduces a latent relation vector learned via a ention to CML. Jhamb et al. [70] proposed using a ention mechanism to improve the performance of autoencoder based CF. Liu et al. [99] proposed a short-term a ention and memory priority based model, in which both long and short term user interests are intergrated for session based recommendation. Ying et al. [189] proposed a hierarchical a ention model for sequential recommendation. Two a ention networks are used to model user long-term and short-term interests.
Introducing a ention mechanism to RNNs could signi cantly improve their performance. Li et al. [90] proposed such an a ention-based LSTM model for hashtag recommendation. is work takes the advantages of both RNNs and a ention mechanism to capture the sequential property and recognize the informative words from microblog posts. Loyala et al. [101] proposed an encoder-decoder architecture with a ention for user session and intents

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:22 • S. Zhang et al.

modelling. is model consists of two RNNs and could capture the transition regularities in a more expressive way.
Vanilla a ention can also work in conjunction with CNNs for recommender tasks. Gong et al. [44] proposed an a ention based CNNs system for hashtag recommendation in microblog. It treats hashtag recommendation as a multi-label classi cation problem. e proposed model consists of a global channel and a local a ention channel.
e global channel is made up of convolution lters and max-pooling layers. All words are encoded in the input of global channel. e local a ention channel has an a ention layer with given window size and threshold to select informative words (known as trigger words in this work). Hence, only trigger words are at play in the subsequent layers. In the follow-up work [127], Seo et al. made use of two neural networks same as [44] (without the last two layers) to learn feature representations from user and item review texts, and predict rating scores with dot product in the nal layer. Wang et al. [169] presented a combined model for article recommendation, in which CNNs is used to learn article representations and a ention is utilized to deal with the diverse variance of editors’s selection behavior.
Recommendation with Co-Attention Zhang et al. [194] proposed a combined model, A Rec, which improves the sequential recommendation performance by capitalizing the strength of both self-a ention and metric learning. It uses self-a ention to learn user short-term intents from her recent interactions and takes the advantages of metric learning to learn more expressive user and item embemddings. Zhou et al. [205] proposed using self-a ention for user heterogeneous behaviour modelling. Self-a ention is simple yet e ective mechanism and has shown superior performance than CNNs and RNNs in terms of sequential recommendation task. We believe that it has the capability to replace many complex neural models and more investigation is expected. Tay et al. [146] proposed a review based recommendation system with multi-pointer co-a ention. e co-a ention enables the model to select information reviews via co-learning from both user and item reviews. Zhang et al. [193] proposed a co-atention based hashtag recommendation model that integrates both visual and textual information. Shi et al. [62] proposed a neural co-a ention model for personalized ranking task with meta-path.

3.8 Neural AutoRegressive based Recommendation

As mentioned above, RBM is not tractable, thus we usually use the Contrastive Divergence algorithm to approxi-

mate the log-likelihood gradient on the parameters [81], which also limits the usage of RBM-CF. e so-called

Neural Autoregressive Distribution Estimator (NADE) is a tractable distribution estimator which provides a

desirable alternative to RBM. Inspired by RBM-CF, Zheng et al. [204] proposed a NADE based collaborative

ltering model (CF-NADE). CF-NADE models the distribution of user ratings. Here, we present a detailed

example to illustrate how the CF-NADE works. Suppose we have 4 movies: m1 (rating is 4), m2 (rating is 2), m3

(rating is 3) and m4 (rating is 5). e CF-NADE models the joint probability of the rating vector r by the chain

rule: p(r) =

D i =1

p(rmoi

|rmo<i

),where

D

is

the

number

of

items

that

the

user

has

rated,

o

is

the

D-tuple

in

the

permutations of (1, 2, ..., D), mi is the index of the ith rated item, rmoi is the rating that the user gives to item moi .

More speci cally, the procedure goes as follows: (1) the probability that the user gives m1 4-star conditioned on

nothing; (2) the probability that the user gives m2 2-star conditioned on giving m1 4-star; (3) the probability that

the user gives m3 3-star conditioned on giving m1 4-star and m2 2-star; (4) the probability that the user gives m4

5-star conditioned on giving m1 4-star, m2 2-star and m3 3-star.

Ideally, the order of movies should follow the time-stamps of ratings. However, empirical study shows that

random drawing also yields good performances. is model can be further extended to a deep model. In the

follow-up paper, Zheng et al. [203] proposed incorporating implicit feedback to overcome the sparsity problem

of rating matrix. Du et al. [36] further imporved this model with a user-item co-autoregressive approach, which

ahieves be er performance in both rating estimation and personalized ranking tasks.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:23
3.9 Deep Reinforcement Learning for Recommendation
Most recommendation models consider the recommendation process as a static process, which makes it di cult to capture user’s temporal intentions and to respond in a timely manner. In recent years, DRL has begun to garner a ention [21, 107, 168, 198–200] in making personalized recommendation. Zhao et al. [199] proposed a DRL framework, DEERS, for recommendation with both negative and positive feedback in a sequential interaction se ing. Zhao et al. [198] explored the page-wise recommendation scenario with DRL, the proposed framework DeepPage is able to adaptively optimize a page of items based on user’s real-time actions. Zheng et al. [200] proposed a news recommendation system, DRN, with DRL to tackle the following three challenges: (1) dynamic changes of news content and user preference; (2) incorporating return pa erns (to the service) of users; (3) increase diversity of recommendations. Chen et al. [16] proposed a robust deep Q-learning algorithm to address the unstable reward estimation issue with two strategies: strati ed sampling replay and approximate regre ed reward. Choi et al. [21] proposed solving the cold-start problem with RL and bi-clustering. Munemasa et al [107] proposed using DRL for stores recommendation.
Reinforcement Learning techniques such as contextual-bandit approach [86] had shown superior recommendation performance in real-world applications. Deep neural networks increase the practicality of RL and make it possible to model various of extra information for designing real-time recommendation strategies.
3.10 Adversarial Network based Recommendation
IRGAN [162] is the rst model which applies GAN to information retrieval area. Speci cally, the authors demonstrated its capability in three information retrieval tasks, including: web search, item recommendation and question answering. In this survey, we mainly focus on how to use IRGAN to recommend items.
Firstly, we introduce the general framework of IRGAN. Traditional GAN consists of a discriminator and a generator. Likely, there are two schools of thinking in information retrieval, that is, generative retrieval and discriminative retrieval. Generative retrieval assumes that there is an underlying generative process between documents and queries, and retrieval tasks can be achieved by generating relevant document d given a query q. Discriminative retrieval learns to predict the relevance score r given labelled relevant query-document pairs. e aim of IRGAN is to combine these two thoughts into a uni ed model, and make them to play a minimax game like generator and discriminator in GAN. e generative retrieval aims to generate relevant documents similar to ground truth to fool the discriminative retrieval model.
Formally, let ptrue (d |qn, r ) refer to the user’s relevance (preference) distribution. e generative retrieval model pθ (d |qn, r ) tries to approximate the true relevance distribution. Discriminative retrieval fϕ (q, d) tries to distinguish between relevant documents and non-relevant documents. Similar to the objective function of GAN, the overall objective is formulated as follows:
N
G∗,D∗ = min max (Ed∼ptrue (d |qn,r )[lo D(d |qn )] + Ed∼pθ (d |qn,r )[lo (1 − D(d |qn ))]) (15)
θϕ n=1
where D(d |qn) = σ (fϕ (q, d)), σ represents the sigmoid function, θ and ϕ are the parameters for generative and discriminative retrieval respectively. Parameter θ and ϕ can be learned alternately with gradient descent.
e above objective equation is constructed for pointwise relevance estimation. In some speci c tasks, it should be in pairwise paradigm to generate higher quality ranking lists. Here, suppose pθ (d |qn, r ) is given by a so max function:
pθ (di |q, r ) = exp( θ (q, di )) (16) dj exp( θ (q, dj ))
θ (q, d) is the chance of document d being generated from query q. In real-word retrieval system, both θ (q, d) and fϕ (q, d) are task-speci c. ey can either have the same or di erent formulations. e authors modelled
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:24 • S. Zhang et al.
them with the same function for convenience, and de ne them as: θ (q, d) = sθ (q, d) and fϕ (q, d) = sϕ (q, d). In the item recommendation scenario, the authors adopted the matrix factorization to formulate s(·). It can be substituted with other advanced models such as factorization machine or neural network.
He et al. [52] proposed an adversarial personalized ranking approach which enhances the Bayesian personalized ranking with adversarial training. It plays a minimax game between the original BPR objective and the adversary which add noises or permutations to maximize the BPR loss. Cai et al. [9] proposed a GAN based representation learning approach for heterogeneous bibliographic network, which can e ectively address the personalized citation recommendation task. Wang et al. [164] proposed using GAN to generate negative samples for the memory network based streaming recommender. Experiments show that the proposed GAN based sampler could signi cantly improve the performance.
3.11 Deep Hybrid Models for Recommendation
With the good exibility of deep neural networks, many neural building blocks can be intergrated to formalize more powerful and expressive models. Despite the abundant possible ways of combination, we suggest that the hybrid model should be reasonably and carefully designed for the speci c tasks. Here, we summarize the existing models that has been proven to be e ective in some application elds.
CNNs and Autoencoder. Collaborative Knowledge Based Embedding (CKE) [192] combines CNNs with autoencoder for images feature extraction. CKE can be viewed as a further step of CDL. CDL only considers item text information (e.g. abstracts of articles and plots of movies), while CKE leverages structural content, textual content and visual content with di erent embedding techniques. Structural information includes the a ributes of items and the relationships among items and users. CKE adopts the TransR [96], a heterogeneous network embedding method, for interpreting structural information. Similarly, CKE employs SDAE to learn feature representations from textual information. As for visual information, CKE adopts a stacked convolutional auto-encoders (SCAE). SCAE makes e cient use of convolution by replacing the fully-connected layers of SDAE with convolutional layers. e recommendation process is done in a probabilistic form similar to CDL.
CNNs and RNNs. Lee et al. [82] proposed a deep hybrid model with RNNs and CNNs for quotes recommendation. ote recommendation is viewed as a task of generating a ranked list of quotes given the query texts or dialogues
(each dialogue contains a sequence of tweets). It applies CNN sto learn signi cant local semantics from tweets and maps them to a distributional vectors. ese distributional vectors are further processed by LSTM to compute the relevance of target quotes to the given tweet dialogues. e overall architecture is shown in Figure 12(a).
Zhang et al. [193] proposed a CNNs and RNNs based hybrid model for hashtag recommendation. Given a tweet with corresponding images, the authors utilized CNNs to extract features from images and LSTM to learn text features from tweets. Meanwhile, the authors proposed a co-a ention mechanism to model the correlation in uences and balance the contribution of texts and images.
Ebsesu et al. [38] presented a neural citation network which integrates CNNs with RNNs in a encoder-decoder framework for citation recommendation. In this model, CNNs act as the encoder that captures the long-term dependencies from citation context. e RNNs work as a decoder which learns the probability of a word in the cited paper’s title given all previous words together with representations a ained by CNNs.
Chen et al. [17] proposed an intergrated framework with CNNs and RNNs for personalized key frame (in videos) recommendation, in which CNNs are used to learn feature representations from key frame images and RNNs are used to process the textual features.
RNNs and Autoencoder. e former mentioned collaborative deep learning model is lack of robustness and incapable of modelling the sequences of text information. Wang et al. [160] further exploited integrating RNNs and denoising autoencoder to overcome this limitations. e authors rst designed a generalization of RNNs named robust recurrent network. Based on the robust recurrent network, the authors proposed the hierarchical
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:25
Bayesian recommendation model called CRAE. CRAE also consists of encoding and decoding parts, but it replaces feedforward neural layers with RNNs, which enables CRAE to capture the sequential information of item content information. Furthermore, the authors designed a wildcard denoising and a beta-pooling technique to prevent the model from over ing.
RNNs with DRL. Wang et al. [163] proposed combining supervised deep reinforcement learning wth RNNs for treatment recommendation. e framework can learn the prescription policy from the indicator signal and evaluation signal. Experiments demonstrate that this system could infer and discover the optimal treatments automatically. We believe that this a valuable topic and bene ts the social good.
4 FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS AND OPEN ISSUES Whilst existing works have established a solid foundation for deep recommender systems research, this section outlines several promising prospective research directions. We also elaborate on several open issues, which we believe is critical to the present state of the eld.
4.1 Joint Representation Learning from User and Item Content Information Making accurate recommendations requires deep understanding of item characteristics and user’s actual demands and preferences [1, 85]. Naturally, this can be achieved by exploiting the abundant auxiliary information. For example, context information tailors services and products according to user’s circumstances and surroundings [151], and mitigate cold start in uence; Implicit feedback indicates users’ implicit intention and is easier to collect while gathering explicit feedback is a resource-demanding task. Although existing works have investigated the e cacy of deep learning model in mining user and item pro les [92, 196], implicit feedback [50, 188, 196, 203], contextual information [38, 75, 118, 149, 151], and review texts [87, 127, 174, 202] for recommendation, they do not utilize these various side information in a comprehensive manner and take the full advantages of the available data. Moreover, there are few works investigating users’ footprints (e.g. Tweets or Facebook posts) from social media [61] and physical world (e.g. Internet of things) [186]. One can infer user’s temporal interests or intentions from these side data resources while deep learning method is a desirable and powerful tool for integrating these additional information. e capability of deep learning in processing heterogeneous data sources also brings more opportunities in recommending diverse items with unstructured data such as textual, visual, audio and video features.
Additionally, feature engineering has not been fully studied in the recommendation research community, but it is essential and widely employed in industrial applications [20, 27]. However, most of the existing models require manually cra ed and selected features, which is time-consuming and tedious. Deep neural network is a promising tool for automatic feature cra ing by reducing manual intervention [129]. ere is also an added advantage of representation learning from free texts, images or data that exists in the ‘wild’ without having to design intricate feature engineering pipelines. More intensive studies on deep feature engineering speci c for recommender systems are expected to save human e orts as well as improve recommendation quality.
An interesting forward looking research problem is how to design neural architectures that best exploits the availability of other modes of data. One recent work potentially paving the way towards models of this nature is the Joint Representation Learning framework [197]. Learning joint (possibly multi-modal representations) of user and items will likely become a next emerging trend in recommender systems research. To this end, a deep learning taking on this aspect would be how to design be er inductive biases (hybrid neural architectures) in an end-to-end fashion. For example, reasoning over di erent modalities (text, images, interaction) data for be er recommendation performance.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:26 • S. Zhang et al.
4.2 Explainable Recommendation with Deep Learning
A common interpretation is that deep neural networks are highly non-interpretable. As such, making explainable recommendations seem to be an uphill task. Along the same vein, it would be also natural to assume that big, complex neural models are just ing the data with any true understanding (see subsequent section on machine reasoning for recommendation). is is precisely why this direction is both exciting and also crucial. ere are mainly two ways that explainable deep learning is important. e rst, is to make explainable predictions to users, allowing them to understand the factors behind the network’s recommendations (i.e., why was this item/service recommended?) [126, 178]. e second track is mainly focused on explain-ability to the practitioner, probing weights and activations to understand more about the model [145].
As of today, a entional models [126, 146, 178] have more or less eased the non-interpretable concerns of neural models. If anything, a ention models have instead led to greater extents of interpretability since the a ention weights not only give insights about the inner workings of the model but are also able to provide explainable results to users. While this has been an existing direction of research ‘pre deep learning’, a entional models are not only capable of enhancing performance but enjoys greater explainability. is further motivates the usage of deep learning for recommendation.
Notably, it is both intuitive and natural that a model’s explainabiity and interpretability strongly relies on the application domain and usage of content information. For example [126, 146] mainly use reviews as a medium of interpretability (which reviews led to making which predictions). Many other mediums/modalities can be considered, such as image [18].
To this end, a promising direction and next step would to be to design be er a entional mechanisms, possibly to the level of providing conversational or generative explanations (along the likes of [87]). Given that models are already capable of highlighting what contributes to the decision, we believe that this is the next frontier.
4.3 Going Deeper for Recommendation
From former studies [53, 53, 177, 195], we found that the performance of most neural CF models plateaus at three to four layers. Going deeper has shown promising performance over shallow networks in many tasks [48, 64], nonetheless, going deeper in the context of deep neural network based RS remains largely unclear. If going deeper give favorable results, how do we train the deep architecture? If not, what is the reason behind this? A possibility is to look into auxiliary losses at di erent layers in similar spirit to [147] albeit hierarchically instead of sequentially. Another possibility is to vary layer-wise learning rates for each layer of the deep network or apply some residual strategies.
4.4 Machine Reasoning for Recommendation ere have been numerous recent advances in machine reasoning in deep learning, o en involving reasoning over
natural language or visual input [67, 124, 181]. We believe that tasks like machine reading, reasoning, question answering or even visual reasoning will have big impacts on the eld of recommender systems. ese tasks are o en glazed over, given that they seem completely arbitrary and irrelevant with respect to recommender systems. However, it is imperative that recommendater systems o en requires reasoning over a single (or multiple) modalities (reviews, text, images, meta-data) which would eventually require borrowing (and adapting) techniques from these related elds. Fundamentally, recommendation and reasoning (e.g., question answering) are highly related in the sense that they are both information retrieval problems.
e single most impactful architectural innovation with neural architectures that are capable of machine reasoning is the key idea of a ention [155, 181]. Notably, this key intuition have already (and very recently) demonstrated e ectiveness on several recommender problems. Tay et al. [146] proposed an co-a entive architecture for reasoning over reviews, and showed that di erent recommendation domains have di erent ‘evidence
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:27
aggregation’ pa erns. For interaction-only recommendation, similar reasoning architectures have utilized similar co-a entive mechanisms for reasoning over meta-paths [62]. To this end, a next frontier for recommender systems is possibly to adapt to situations that require multi-step inference and reasoning. A simple example would to reason over a user’s social pro le, purchases etc., reasoning over multiple modalities to recommend a product. All in all, we can expect that reasoning architectures to start to take the foreground in recommender system research.
4.5 Cross Domain Recommendation with Deep Neural Networks
Nowadays, many large companies o er diversi ed products or services to customers. For example, Google provides us with web searches, mobile applications and news services; We can buy books, electronics and clothes from Amazon. Single domain recommender system only focuses on one domain while ignores the user interests on other domains, which also exacerbates sparsity and cold start problems [74]. Cross domain recommender system, which assists target domain recommendation with the knowledge learned from source domains, provides a desirable solution for these problems. One of the most widely studied topics in cross domain recommendation is transfer learning which aims to improve learning tasks in one domain by using knowledge transferred from other domains [40, 115]. Deep learning is well suited to transfer learning as it learn high-level abstractions that disentangle the variation of di erent domains. Several existing works [39, 92] indicate the e cacy of deep learning in catching the generalizations and di erences across di erent domains and generating be er recommendations on cross-domain platforms. erefore, it is a promising but largely under-explored area where mores studies are expected.
4.6 Deep Multi-Task Learning for Recommendation
Multi-task learning has led to successes in many deep learning tasks, from computer vision to natural language processing [26, 31]. Among the reviewed studies, several works [5, 73, 87, 187] also applied multi-task learning to recommender system in a deep neural framework and achieved some improvements over single task learning. e advantages of applying deep neural network based multi-task learning are three-fold: (1) learning several tasks at a time can prevent over ing by generalizing the shared hidden representations; (2) auxiliary task provides interpretable output for explaining the recommendation; (3) multi-task provides an implicit data augmentation for alleviating the sparsity problem. Multitask can be utilized in traditional recommender system [111], while deep learning enables them to be integrated in a tighter fashion. Apart from introducing side tasks, we can also deploy the multitask learning for cross domain recommendation with each speci c task generating recommendation for each domain.
4.7 Scalability of Deep Neural Networks for Recommendation
e increasing data volumes in the big data era poses challenges to real-world applications. Consequently, scalability is critical to the usefulness of recommendation models in real-world systems, and the time complexity will also be a principal consideration for choosing models. Fortunately, deep learning has demonstrated to be very e ective and promising in big data analytics [109] especially with the increase of GPU computation power. However, more future works should be studied on how to recommend e ciently by exploring the following problems: (1) incremental learning for non-stationary and streaming data such as large volume of incoming users and items; (2) computation e ciency for high-dimensional tensors and multimedia data sources; (3) balancing of the model complexity and scalability with the exponential growth of parameters. A promising area of research in this area involves knowledge distillation which have been explored in [144] for learning small/compact models for inference in recommender systems. e key idea is to train a smaller student model that absorbs knowledge from the large teacher model. Given that inference time is crucial for real time applications at a million/billion user scale, we believe that this is another promising direction which warrants further investigation. Another
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:28 • S. Zhang et al.
promising direction involves compression techniques [128]. e high-dimensional input data can be compressed to compact embedding to reduce the space and computation time during model learning.
4.8 The Field Needs Be er, More Unified and Harder Evaluation
Each time a new model is proposed, it is expected that the publication o ers evaluation and comparisons against several baselines. e selection of baselines and datasets on most papers are seemingly arbitrary and authors generally have free reign over the choices of datasets/baselines. ere are several issues with this.
Firstly, this creates an inconsistent reporting of scores, with each author reporting their own assortment of results. Till this day, there is seemingly on consensus on a general ranking of models (Notably, we acknowledge that the no free lunch theorem exists). Occasionally, we nd that results can be con icting and relative positions change very frequently. For example, the scores of NCF in [201] is relatively ranked very low as compared to the original paper that proposed the model [53]. is makes the relative benchmark of new neural models extremely challenging. e question is how do we solve this? Looking into neighbouring elds (computer vision or natural language processing), this is indeed perplexing. Why is there no MNIST, ImageNet or S AD for recommender systems? As such, we believe that a suite of standardized evaluation datasets should be proposed.
We also note that datasets such as MovieLens are commonly used by many practioners in evaluating their models. However, test splits are o en arbitrary (randomized). e second problem is that there is no control over the evaluation procedure. To this end, we urge the recommender systems community to follow the CV/NLP communities and establish a hidden/blinded test set in which prediction results can be only submi ed via a web interface (such as Kaggle).
Finally, a third recurring problem is that there is no control over the di culty of test samples in recommender system result. Is spli ing by time the best? How do we know if test samples are either too trivial or impossible to infer? Without designing proper test sets, we argue that it is in fact hard to estimate and measure progress of the
eld. To this end, we believe that the eld of recommender systems have a lot to learn from computer vision or NLP communities.
5 CONCLUSION
In this article, we provided an extensive review of the most notable works to date on deep learning based recommender systems. We proposed a classi cation scheme for organizing and clustering existing publications, and highlighted a bunch of in uential research prototypes. We also discussed the advantages/disadvantages of using deep learning techniques for recommendation tasks. Additionally, we detail some of the most pressing open problems and promising future extensions. Both deep learning and recommender systems are ongoing hot research topics in the recent decades. ere are a large number of new developing techniques and emerging models each year. We hope this survey can provide readers with a comprehensive understanding towards the key aspects of this eld, clarify the most notable advancements and shed some light on future studies.
REFERENCES
[1] Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. 2005. Toward the next generation of recommender systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering 17, 6 (2005), 734–749.
[2] Taleb Alashkar, Songyao Jiang, Shuyang Wang, and Yun Fu. 2017. Examples-Rules Guided Deep Neural Network for Makeup Recommendation. In AAAI. 941–947.
[3] Jimmy Ba, Volodymyr Mnih, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2014. Multiple object recognition with visual a ention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7755 (2014).
[4] Bing Bai, Yushun Fan, Wei Tan, and Jia Zhang. 2017. DLTSR: A Deep Learning Framework for Recommendation of Long-tail Web Services. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (2017).
[5] Trapit Bansal, David Belanger, and Andrew McCallum. 2016. Ask the gru: Multi-task learning for deep text recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 107–114.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:29
[6] Rianne van den Berg, omas N Kipf, and Max Welling. 2017. Graph convolutional matrix completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02263 (2017).
[7] Basiliyos Tilahun Betru, Charles Awono Onana, and Bernabe Batchakui. 2017. Deep Learning Methods on Recommender System: A Survey of State-of-the-art. International Journal of Computer Applications 162, 10 (Mar 2017).
[8] Robin Burke. 2002. Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and experiments. User modeling and user-adapted interaction 12, 4 (2002), 331–370.
[9] Xiaoyan Cai, Junwei Han, and Libin Yang. 2018. Generative Adversarial Network Based Heterogeneous Bibliographic Network Representation for Personalized Citation Recommendation. In AAAI.
[10] S. Cao, N. Yang, and Z. Liu. 2017. Online news recommender based on stacked auto-encoder. In ICIS. 721–726. [11] Rose Catherine and William Cohen. 2017. Transnets: Learning to transform for recommendation. In Recsys. 288–296. [12] Cheng Chen, Xiangwu Meng, Zhenghua Xu, and omas Lukasiewicz. 2017. Location-Aware Personalized News Recommendation
With Deep Semantic Analysis. IEEE Access 5 (2017), 1624–1638. [13] Cen Chen, Peilin Zhao, Longfei Li, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, and Minghui Qiu. 2017. Locally Connected Deep Learning Framework for
Industrial-scale Recommender Systems. In WWW. [14] Jingyuan Chen, Hanwang Zhang, Xiangnan He, Liqiang Nie, Wei Liu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. A entive Collaborative Filtering:
Multimedia Recommendation with Item- and Component-Level A ention. (2017). [15] Minmin Chen, Zhixiang Xu, Kilian Weinberger, and Fei Sha. 2012. Marginalized denoising autoencoders for domain adaptation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1206.4683 (2012). [16] Shi-Yong Chen, Yang Yu, Qing Da, Jun Tan, Hai-Kuan Huang, and Hai-Hong Tang. 2018. Stabilizing reinforcement learning in dynamic
environment with application to online recommendation. In SIGKDD. 1187–1196. [17] Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Qingyao Ai, Hongteng Xu, Junchi Yan, and Zheng Qin. 2017. Personalized Key Frame Recommendation. In
SIGIR. [18] Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Hongteng Xu, Yixin Cao, Zheng Qin, and Hongyuan Zha. 2018. Visually Explainable Recommendation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10288 (2018). [19] Yifan Chen and Maarten de Rijke. 2018. A Collective Variational Autoencoder for Top-N Recommendation with Side Information.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05730 (2018). [20] Heng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra, Hrishi Aradhye, Glen Anderson, Greg Corrado, Wei
Chai, Mustafa Ispir, and others. 2016. Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In Recsys. 7–10. [21] Sungwoon Choi, Heonseok Ha, Uiwon Hwang, Chanju Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Sungroh Yoon. 2018. Reinforcement Learning based
Recommender System using Biclustering Technique. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05532 (2018). [22] Jan Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. End-to-end continuous speech recognition using
a ention-based recurrent NN: rst results. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1602 (2014). [23] Jan K Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. A ention-based models for speech
recognition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 577–585. [24] Konstantina Christakopoulou, Alex Beutel, Rui Li, Sagar Jain, and Ed H Chi. 2018. Q&R: A Two-Stage Approach toward Interactive
Recommendation. In SIGKDD. 139–148. [25] Wei-Ta Chu and Ya-Lun Tsai. 2017. A hybrid recommendation system considering visual information for predicting favorite restaurants.
WWWJ (2017), 1–19. [26] Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. 2008. A uni ed architecture for natural language processing: Deep neural networks with multitask
learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning. 160–167. [27] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. 2016. Deep neural networks for youtube recommendations. In Recsys. 191–198. [28] Hanjun Dai, Yichen Wang, Rakshit Trivedi, and Le Song. 2016. Deep coevolutionary network: Embedding user and item features for
recommendation. arXiv preprint. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03675 (2016). [29] Hanjun Dai, Yichen Wang, Rakshit Trivedi, and Le Song. 2016. Recurrent coevolutionary latent feature processes for continuous-time
recommendation. In Recsys. 29–34. [30] James Davidson, Benjamin Liebald, Junning Liu, Palash Nandy, Taylor Van Vleet, Ullas Gargi, Sujoy Gupta, Yu He, Mike Lambert, Blake
Livingston, and Dasarathi Sampath. 2010. e YouTube Video Recommendation System. In Recsys. [31] Li Deng, Dong Yu, and others. 2014. Deep learning: methods and applications. Foundations and Trends® in Signal Processing 7, 3–4
(2014), 197–387. [32] Shuiguang Deng, Longtao Huang, Guandong Xu, Xindong Wu, and Zhaohui Wu. 2017. On deep learning for trust-aware recommenda-
tions in social networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 28, 5 (2017), 1164–1177. [33] Robin Devooght and Hugues Bersini. 2016. Collaborative ltering with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.07400
(2016). [34] Xin Dong, Lei Yu, Zhonghuo Wu, Yuxia Sun, Lingfeng Yuan, and Fangxi Zhang. 2017. A Hybrid Collaborative Filtering Model with
Deep Structure for Recommender Systems. In AAAI. 1309–1315.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:30 • S. Zhang et al.
[35] Tim Donkers, Benedikt Loepp, and Ju¨rgen Ziegler. 2017. Sequential user-based recurrent neural network recommendations. In Recsys. 152–160.
[36] Chao Du, Chongxuan Li, Yin Zheng, Jun Zhu, and Bo Zhang. 2016. Collaborative Filtering with User-Item Co-Autoregressive Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07146 (2016).
[37] Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. 2015. Neural network matrix factorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06443 (2015). [38] Travis Ebesu and Yi Fang. 2017. Neural Citation Network for Context-Aware Citation Recommendation. (2017). [39] Ali Mamdouh Elkahky, Yang Song, and Xiaodong He. 2015. A multi-view deep learning approach for cross domain user modeling in
recommendation systems. In WWW. 278–288. [40] Ignacio Ferna´ndez-Tob´ıas, Iva´n Cantador, Marius Kaminskas, and Francesco Ricci. 2012. Cross-domain recommender systems: A survey
of the state of the art. In Spanish Conference on Information Retrieval. 24. [41] Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, Michael Gamon, Xiaodong He, and Patrick Pantel. 2014. Modeling interestingness with deep neural networks.
(June 13 2014). US Patent App. 14/304,863. [42] Kostadin Georgiev and Preslav Nakov. 2013. A non-iid framework for collaborative ltering with restricted boltzmann machines. In
ICML. 1148–1156. [43] Carlos A Gomez-Uribe and Neil Hunt. 2016. e net ix recommender system: Algorithms, business value, and innovation. TMIS 6, 4
(2016), 13. [44] Yuyun Gong and Qi Zhang. 2016. Hashtag Recommendation Using A ention-Based Convolutional Neural Network.. In IJCAI. 2782–2788. [45] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press. h p://www.deeplearningbook.org. [46] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
2014. Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS. 2672–2680. [47] Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, and Xiuqiang He. 2017. DeepFM: A Factorization-Machine based Neural Network
for CTR Prediction. In IJCAI. 2782–2788. [48] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pa ern recognition. 770–778. [49] Ruining He and Julian McAuley. 2016. Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution of fashion trends with one-class collaborative
ltering. In WWW. 507–517. [50] Ruining He and Julian McAuley. 2016. VBPR: Visual Bayesian Personalized Ranking from Implicit Feedback. In AAAI. 144–150. [51] Xiangnan He, Xiaoyu Du, Xiang Wang, Feng Tian, Jinhui Tang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2018. Outer Product-based Neural Collaborative
Filtering. (2018). [52] Xiangnan He, Zhankui He, Xiaoyu Du, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2018. Adversarial Personalized Ranking for Recommendation. In SIGIR.
355–364. [53] Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. Neural collaborative ltering. In WWW.
173–182. [54] Xiangnan He and Chua Tat-Seng. 2017. Neural Factorization Machines for Sparse Predictive Analytics. (2017). [55] Bala´zs Hidasi and Alexandros Karatzoglou. 2017. Recurrent neural networks with top-k gains for session-based recommendations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03847 (2017). [56] Bala´zs Hidasi, Alexandros Karatzoglou, Linas Baltrunas, and Domonkos Tikk. 2015. Session-based recommendations with recurrent
neural networks. International Conference on Learning Representations (2015). [57] Bala´zs Hidasi, Massimo adrana, Alexandros Karatzoglou, and Domonkos Tikk. 2016. Parallel recurrent neural network architectures
for feature-rich session-based recommendations. In Recsys. 241–248. [58] Kurt Hornik. 1991. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. Neural networks 4, 2 (1991), 251–257. [59] Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. 1989. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. Neural
networks 2, 5 (1989), 359–366. [60] Cheng-Kang Hsieh, Longqi Yang, Yin Cui, Tsung-Yi Lin, Serge Belongie, and Deborah Estrin. 2017. Collaborative metric learning. In
WWW. 193–201. [61] Cheng-Kang Hsieh, Longqi Yang, Honghao Wei, Mor Naaman, and Deborah Estrin. 2016. Immersive recommendation: News and event
recommendations using personal digital traces. In WWW. 51–62. [62] Binbin Hu, Chuan Shi, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Philip S Yu. 2018. Leveraging Meta-path based Context for Top-N Recommendation with
A Neural Co-A ention Model. In SIGKDD. 1531–1540. [63] Yifan Hu, Yehuda Koren, and Chris Volinsky. 2008. Collaborative Filtering for Implicit Feedback Datasets. In ICDM. [64] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. 2017. Densely Connected Convolutional Networks.. In
CVPR, Vol. 1. 3. [65] Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. 2013. Learning deep structured semantic models for
web search using clickthrough data. In CIKM. 2333–2338.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:31
[66] Wenyi Huang, Zhaohui Wu, Liang Chen, Prasenjit Mitra, and C Lee Giles. 2015. A Neural Probabilistic Model for Context Based Citation Recommendation. In AAAI. 2404–2410.
[67] Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. 2018. Compositional a ention networks for machine reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03067 (2018).
[68] Dietmar Jannach and Malte Ludewig. 2017. When Recurrent Neural Networks Meet the Neighborhood for Session-Based Recommendation. In Recsys.
[69] Dietmar Jannach, Markus Zanker, Alexander Felfernig, and Gerhard Friedrich. 2010. Recommender systems: an introduction. [70] Yogesh Jhamb, Travis Ebesu, and Yi Fang. 2018. A entive Contextual Denoising Autoencoder for Recommendation. (2018). [71] X. Jia, X. Li, K. Li, V. Gopalakrishnan, G. Xun, and A. Zhang. 2016. Collaborative restricted Boltzmann machine for social event
recommendation. In ASONAM. 402–405. [72] Xiaowei Jia, Aosen Wang, Xiaoyi Li, Guangxu Xun, Wenyao Xu, and Aidong Zhang. 2015. Multi-modal learning for video recommenda-
tion based on mobile application usage. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). 837–842. [73] How Jing and Alexander J Smola. 2017. Neural survival recommender. In WSDM. 515–524. [74] Muhammad Murad Khan, Roliana Ibrahim, and Imran Ghani. 2017. Cross Domain Recommender Systems: A Systematic Literature
Review. ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 3 (June 2017). [75] Donghyun Kim, Chanyoung Park, Jinoh Oh, Sungyoung Lee, and Hwanjo Yu. 2016. Convolutional matrix factorization for document
context-aware recommendation. In Recsys. 233–240. [76] Donghyun Kim, Chanyoung Park, Jinoh Oh, and Hwanjo Yu. 2017. Deep Hybrid Recommender Systems via Exploiting Document
Context and Statistics of Items. Information Sciences (2017). [77] omas N Kipf and Max Welling. 2016. Semi-supervised classi cation with graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907
(2016). [78] Young-Jun Ko, Lucas Maystre, and Ma hias Grossglauser. 2016. Collaborative recurrent neural networks for dynamic recommender
systems. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning. 366–381. [79] Yehuda Koren. 2008. Factorization meets the neighborhood: a multifaceted collaborative ltering model. In SIGKDD. 426–434. [80] Yehuda Koren. 2010. Collaborative ltering with temporal dynamics. Commun. ACM 53, 4 (2010), 89–97. [81] Hugo Larochelle and Iain Murray. 2011. e neural autoregressive distribution estimator. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
Conference on Arti cial Intelligence and Statistics. 29–37. [82] Hanbit Lee, Yeonchan Ahn, Haejun Lee, Seungdo Ha, and Sang-goo Lee. 2016. ote Recommendation in Dialogue using Deep Neural
Network. In SIGIR. 957–960. [83] Joonseok Lee, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, and Apostol Paul Natsev. 2018. Collaborative Deep Metric Learning for
Video Understanding. (2018). [84] Chenyi Lei, Dong Liu, Weiping Li, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Houqiang Li. 2016. Comparative Deep Learning of Hybrid Representations for
Image Recommendations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ern Recognition. 2545–2553. [85] Jure Leskovec. 2015. New Directions in Recommender Systems. In WSDM. [86] Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. 2010. A contextual-bandit approach to personalized news article recommen-
dation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web. 661–670. [87] Piji Li, Zihao Wang, Zhaochun Ren, Lidong Bing, and Wai Lam. 2017. Neural Rating Regression with Abstractive Tips Generation for
Recommendation. (2017). [88] Sheng Li, Jaya Kawale, and Yun Fu. 2015. Deep collaborative ltering via marginalized denoising auto-encoder. In CIKM. 811–820. [89] Xiaopeng Li and James She. 2017. Collaborative Variational Autoencoder for Recommender Systems. In SIGKDD. [90] Yang Li, Ting Liu, Jing Jiang, and Liang Zhang. 2016. Hashtag recommendation with topical a ention-based LSTM. In COLING. [91] Zhi Li, Hongke Zhao, Qi Liu, Zhenya Huang, Tao Mei, and Enhong Chen. 2018. Learning from History and Present: Next-item
Recommendation via Discriminatively Exploiting User Behaviors. In SIGKDD. 1734–1743. [92] Jianxun Lian, Fuzheng Zhang, Xing Xie, and Guangzhong Sun. 2017. CCCFNet: A Content-Boosted Collaborative Filtering Neural
Network for Cross Domain Recommender Systems. In WWW. 817–818. [93] Jianxun Lian, Xiaohuan Zhou, Fuzheng Zhang, Zhongxia Chen, Xing Xie, and Guangzhong Sun. 2018. xDeepFM: Combining Explicit
and Implicit Feature Interactions for Recommender Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05170 (2018). [94] Dawen Liang, Rahul G Krishnan, Ma hew D Ho man, and Tony Jebara. 2018. Variational Autoencoders for Collaborative Filtering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05814 (2018). [95] Dawen Liang, Minshu Zhan, and Daniel PW Ellis. 2015. Content-Aware Collaborative Music Recommendation Using Pre-trained Neural
Networks.. In ISMIR. 295–301. [96] Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu. 2015. Learning Entity and Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Graph
Completion. In AAAI. 2181–2187. [97] Juntao Liu and Caihua Wu. 2017. Deep Learning Based Recommendation: A Survey. [98] Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. 2017. DeepStyle: Learning User Preferences for Visual Recommendation. (2017).
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:32 • S. Zhang et al.
[99] Qiao Liu, Yifu Zeng, Refuoe Mokhosi, and Haibin Zhang. 2018. STAMP: Short-Term A ention/Memory Priority Model for Session-based Recommendation. In SIGKDD. 1831–1839.
[100] Xiaomeng Liu, Yuanxin Ouyang, Wenge Rong, and Zhang Xiong. 2015. Item Category Aware Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine Based Recommendation. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing. 609–616.
[101] Pablo Loyola, Chen Liu, and Yu Hirate. 2017. Modeling User Session and Intent with an A ention-based Encoder-Decoder Architecture. In Recsys. 147–151.
[102] Pablo Loyola, Chen Liu, and Yu Hirate. 2017. Modeling User Session and Intent with an A ention-based Encoder-Decoder Architecture. In Recsys (RecSys ’17).
[103] Malte Ludewig and Dietmar Jannach. 2018. Evaluation of Session-based Recommendation Algorithms. CoRR abs/1803.09587 (2018). [104] Minh- ang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. E ective approaches to a ention-based neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025 (2015). [105] Julian McAuley, Christopher Targe , Qinfeng Shi, and Anton Van Den Hengel. 2015. Image-based recommendations on styles and
substitutes. In SIGIR. 43–52. [106] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller,
Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, and others. 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518, 7540 (2015), 529. [107] Isshu Munemasa, Yuta Tomomatsu, Kunioki Hayashi, and Tomohiro Takagi. 2018. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Recommender Systems. (2018). [108] Cataldo Musto, Claudio Greco, Alessandro Suglia, and Giovanni Semeraro. 2016. Ask Me Any Rating: A Content-based Recommender System based on Recurrent Neural Networks. In IIR. [109] Maryam M Najafabadi, Flavio Villanustre, Taghi M Khoshgo aar, Naeem Seliya, Randall Wald, and Edin Muharemagic. 2015. Deep learning applications and challenges in big data analytics. Journal of Big Data 2, 1 (2015), 1. [110] Hanh T. H. Nguyen, Martin Wistuba, Josif Grabocka, Lucas Rego Drumond, and Lars Schmidt- ieme. 2017. Personalized Deep Learning for Tag Recommendation. [111] Xia Ning and George Karypis. 2010. Multi-task learning for recommender system. In Proceedings of 2nd Asian Conference on Machine Learning. 269–284. [112] Wei Niu, James Caverlee, and Haokai Lu. 2018. Neural Personalized Ranking for Image Recommendation. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 423–431. [113] Shumpei Okura, Yukihiro Tagami, Shingo Ono, and Akira Tajima. 2017. Embedding-based News Recommendation for Millions of Users. In SIGKDD. [114] Yuanxin Ouyang, Wenqi Liu, Wenge Rong, and Zhang Xiong. 2014. Autoencoder-based collaborative ltering. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing. 284–291. [115] Weike Pan, Evan Wei Xiang, Nathan Nan Liu, and Qiang Yang. 2010. Transfer Learning in Collaborative Filtering for Sparsity Reduction. In AAAI, Vol. 10. 230–235. [116] Yiteng Pana, Fazhi Hea, and Haiping Yua. 2017. Trust-aware Collaborative Denoising Auto-Encoder for Top-N Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01760 (2017). [117] Massimo adrana, Alexandros Karatzoglou, Bala´zs Hidasi, and Paolo Cremonesi. 2017. Personalizing session-based recommendations with hierarchical recurrent neural networks. In Recsys. 130–137. [118] Yogesh Singh Rawat and Mohan S Kankanhalli. 2016. ConTagNet: exploiting user context for image tag recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on Multimedia Conference. 1102–1106. [119] S. Rendle. 2010. Factorization Machines. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. [120] Ste en Rendle, Christoph Freudenthaler, Zeno Gantner, and Lars Schmidt- ieme. 2009. BPR: Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. In Proceedings of the twenty- h conference on uncertainty in arti cial intelligence. 452–461. [121] Francesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, and Bracha Shapira. 2015. Recommender systems: introduction and challenges. In Recommender systems handbook. 1–34. [122] Salah Rifai, Pascal Vincent, Xavier Muller, Xavier Glorot, and Yoshua Bengio. 2011. Contractive auto-encoders: Explicit invariance during feature extraction. In ICML. 833–840. [123] Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Andriy Mnih, and Geo rey Hinton. 2007. Restricted Boltzmann machines for collaborative ltering. In ICML. 791–798. [124] Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G Barre , Mateusz Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter Ba aglia, and Tim Lillicrap. 2017. A simple neural network module for relational reasoning. In NIPS. 4967–4976. [125] Suvash Sedhain, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sco Sanner, and Lexing Xie. 2015. Autorec: Autoencoders meet collaborative ltering. In WWW. 111–112. [126] Sungyong Seo, Jing Huang, Hao Yang, and Yan Liu. 2017. Interpretable convolutional neural networks with dual local and global a ention for review rating prediction. In Recsys. 297–305.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:33
[127] Sungyong Seo, Jing Huang, Hao Yang, and Yan Liu. 2017. Representation Learning of Users and Items for Review Rating Prediction Using A ention-based Convolutional Neural Network. In MLRec.
[128] Joan Serra` and Alexandros Karatzoglou. 2017. Ge ing deep recommenders t: Bloom embeddings for sparse binary input/output networks. In Recsys. 279–287.
[129] Ying Shan, T Ryan Hoens, Jian Jiao, Haijing Wang, Dong Yu, and JC Mao. 2016. Deep Crossing: Web-scale modeling without manually cra ed combinatorial features. In SIGKDD. 255–262.
[130] Xiaoxuan Shen, Baolin Yi, Zhaoli Zhang, Jiangbo Shu, and Hai Liu. 2016. Automatic Recommendation Technology for Learning Resources with Convolutional Neural Network. In International Symposium on Educational Technology. 30–34.
[131] Yue Shi, Martha Larson, and Alan Hanjalic. 2014. Collaborative ltering beyond the user-item matrix: A survey of the state of the art and future challenges. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 47, 1 (2014), 3.
[132] Elena Smirnova and Flavian Vasile. 2017. Contextual Sequence Modeling for Recommendation with Recurrent Neural Networks. (2017).
[133] Harold Soh, Sco Sanner, Madeleine White, and Greg Jamieson. 2017. Deep Sequential Recommendation for Personalized Adaptive User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 589–593.
[134] Bo Song, Xin Yang, Yi Cao, and Congfu Xu. 2018. Neural Collaborative Ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04957 (2018). [135] Yang Song, Ali Mamdouh Elkahky, and Xiaodong He. 2016. Multi-rate deep learning for temporal recommendation. In SIGIR. 909–912. [136] Florian Strub, Romaric Gaudel, and Je´re´mie Mary. 2016. Hybrid Recommender System based on Autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems. 11–16. [137] Florian Strub and Jeremie Mary. 2015. Collaborative Filtering with Stacked Denoising AutoEncoders and Sparse Inputs. In NIPS
Workshop. [138] Xiaoyuan Su and Taghi M Khoshgo aar. 2009. A survey of collaborative ltering techniques. Advances in arti cial intelligence 2009
(2009), 4. [139] Alessandro Suglia, Claudio Greco, Cataldo Musto, Marco de Gemmis, Pasquale Lops, and Giovanni Semeraro. 2017. A Deep Architecture
for Content-based Recommendations Exploiting Recurrent Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization. 202–211. [140] Yosuke Suzuki and Tomonobu Ozaki. 2017. Stacked Denoising Autoencoder-Based Deep Collaborative Filtering Using the Change of Similarity. In WAINA. 498–502. [141] Jiwei Tan, Xiaojun Wan, and Jianguo Xiao. 2016. A Neural Network Approach to ote Recommendation in Writings. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 65–74. [142] Yong Kiam Tan, Xinxing Xu, and Yong Liu. 2016. Improved recurrent neural networks for session-based recommendations. In Recsys. 17–22. [143] Jiaxi Tang and Ke Wang. 2018. Personalized top-n sequential recommendation via convolutional sequence embedding. In WSDM. 565–573. [144] Jiaxi Tang and Ke Wang. 2018. Ranking Distillation: Learning Compact Ranking Models With High Performance for Recommender System. In SIGKDD. [145] Yi Tay, Luu Anh Tuan, and Siu Cheung Hui. 2018. Latent Relational Metric Learning via Memory-based A ention for Collaborative Ranking. In WWW. [146] Yi Tay, Anh Tuan Luu, and Siu Cheung Hui. 2018. Multi-Pointer Co-A ention Networks for Recommendation. In SIGKDD. [147] Trieu H Trinh, Andrew M Dai, ang Luong, and oc V Le. 2018. Learning longer-term dependencies in rnns with auxiliary losses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00144 (2018). [148] Trinh Xuan Tuan and Tu Minh Phuong. 2017. 3D Convolutional Networks for Session-based Recommendation with Content Features. In Recsys. 138–146. [149] Bartlomiej Twardowski. 2016. Modelling Contextual Information in Session-Aware Recommender Systems with Neural Networks. In Recsys. [150] Moshe Unger. 2015. Latent Context-Aware Recommender Systems. In Recsys. 383–386. [151] Moshe Unger, Ariel Bar, Bracha Shapira, and Lior Rokach. 2016. Towards latent context-aware recommendation systems. KnowledgeBased Systems 104 (2016), 165–178. [152] Benigno Uria, Marc-Alexandre Coˆte´, Karol Gregor, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle. 2016. Neural autoregressive distribution estimation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 17, 205 (2016), 1–37. [153] Aaron Van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, and Benjamin Schrauwen. 2013. Deep content-based music recommendation. In NIPS. 2643–2651. [154] Manasi Vartak, Arvind iagarajan, Conrado Miranda, Jeshua Bratman, and Hugo Larochelle. 2017. A Meta-Learning Perspective on Cold-Start Recommendations for Items. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 6904–6914. [155] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. A ention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 5998–6008.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

1:34 • S. Zhang et al.
[156] Maksims Volkovs, Guangwei Yu, and Tomi Poutanen. 2017. DropoutNet: Addressing Cold Start in Recommender Systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 4957–4966.
[157] Jeroen B. P. Vuurens, Martha Larson, and Arjen P. de Vries. 2016. Exploring Deep Space: Learning Personalized Ranking in a Semantic Space. In Recsys.
[158] Hao Wang, Xingjian Shi, and Dit-Yan Yeung. 2015. Relational Stacked Denoising Autoencoder for Tag Recommendation.. In AAAI. 3052–3058.
[159] Hao Wang, Naiyan Wang, and Dit-Yan Yeung. 2015. Collaborative deep learning for recommender systems. In SIGKDD. 1235–1244. [160] Hao Wang, SHI Xingjian, and Dit-Yan Yeung. 2016. Collaborative recurrent autoencoder: Recommend while learning to ll in the
blanks. In NIPS. 415–423. [161] Hao Wang and Dit-Yan Yeung. 2016. Towards Bayesian deep learning: A framework and some existing methods. TKDE 28, 12 (2016),
3395–3408. [162] Jun Wang, Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Yu Gong, Yinghui Xu, Benyou Wang, Peng Zhang, and Dell Zhang. 2017. IRGAN: A Minimax
Game for Unifying Generative and Discriminative Information Retrieval Models. (2017). [163] Lu Wang, Wei Zhang, Xiaofeng He, and Hongyuan Zha. 2018. Supervised Reinforcement Learning with Recurrent Neural Network for
Dynamic Treatment Recommendation. In SIGKDD. 2447–2456. [164] Qinyong Wang, Hongzhi Yin, Zhiting Hu, Defu Lian, Hao Wang, and Zi Huang. 2018. Neural Memory Streaming Recommender
Networks with Adversarial Training. In SIGKDD. [165] Suhang Wang, Yilin Wang, Jiliang Tang, Kai Shu, Suhas Ranganath, and Huan Liu. 2017. What Your Images Reveal: Exploiting Visual
Contents for Point-of-Interest Recommendation. In WWW. [166] Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Liqiang Nie, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. Item Silk Road: Recommending Items from Information Domains to
Social Users. (2017). [167] Xinxi Wang and Ye Wang. 2014. Improving content-based and hybrid music recommendation using deep learning. In MM. 627–636. [168] Xinxi Wang, Yi Wang, David Hsu, and Ye Wang. 2014. Exploration in interactive personalized music recommendation: a reinforcement
learning approach. TOMM 11, 1 (2014), 7. [169] Xuejian Wang, Lantao Yu, Kan Ren, Guangyu Tao, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Jun Wang. 2017. Dynamic A ention Deep Model for
Article Recommendation by Learning Human Editors Demonstration. In SIGKDD. [170] Jian Wei, Jianhua He, Kai Chen, Yi Zhou, and Zuoyin Tang. 2016. Collaborative ltering and deep learning based hybrid recommendation
for cold start problem. IEEE, 874–877. [171] Jian Wei, Jianhua He, Kai Chen, Yi Zhou, and Zuoyin Tang. 2017. Collaborative ltering and deep learning based recommendation
system for cold start items. Expert Systems with Applications 69 (2017), 29–39. [172] Jiqing Wen, Xiaopeng Li, James She, Soochang Park, and Ming Cheung. 2016. Visual background recommendation for dance
performances using dancer-shared images. 521–527. [173] Caihua Wu, Junwei Wang, Juntao Liu, and Wenyu Liu. 2016. Recurrent neural network based recommendation for time heterogeneous
feedback. Knowledge-Based Systems 109 (2016), 90–103. [174] Chao-Yuan Wu, Amr Ahmed, Alex Beutel, and Alexander J Smola. 2016. Joint Training of Ratings and Reviews with Recurrent
Recommender Networks. (2016). [175] Chao-Yuan Wu, Amr Ahmed, Alex Beutel, Alexander J Smola, and How Jing. 2017. Recurrent recommender networks. In WSDM.
495–503. [176] Sai Wu, Weichao Ren, Chengchao Yu, Gang Chen, Dongxiang Zhang, and Jingbo Zhu. 2016. Personal recommendation using deep
recurrent neural networks in NetEase. In ICDE. 1218–1229. [177] Yao Wu, Christopher DuBois, Alice X Zheng, and Martin Ester. 2016. Collaborative denoising auto-encoders for top-n recommender
systems. In WSDM. 153–162. [178] Jun Xiao, Hao Ye, Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, Fei Wu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. A entional factorization machines: Learning the
weight of feature interactions via a ention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04617 (2017). [179] Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Rui Yan, and Maosong Sun. 2016. Neural Emoji Recommendation in Dialogue Systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.04609 (2016). [180] Weizhu Xie, Yuanxin Ouyang, Jingshuai Ouyang, Wenge Rong, and Zhang Xiong. 2016. User Occupation Aware Conditional Restricted
Boltzmann Machine Based Recommendation. 454–461. [181] Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Richard Socher. 2016. Dynamic coa ention networks for question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01604 (2016). [182] Zhenghua Xu, Cheng Chen, omas Lukasiewicz, Yishu Miao, and Xiangwu Meng. 2016. Tag-aware personalized recommendation
using a deep-semantic similarity model with negative sampling. In CIKM. 1921–1924. [183] Zhenghua Xu, omas Lukasiewicz, Cheng Chen, Yishu Miao, and Xiangwu Meng. 2017. Tag-aware personalized recommendation
using a hybrid deep model. (2017).
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey and New Perspectives • 1:35
[184] Hong-Jian Xue, Xinyu Dai, Jianbing Zhang, Shujian Huang, and Jiajun Chen. 2017. Deep Matrix Factorization Models for Recommender Systems.. In IJCAI. 3203–3209.
[185] Carl Yang, Lanxiao Bai, Chao Zhang, an Yuan, and Jiawei Han. 2017. Bridging Collaborative Filtering and Semi-Supervised Learning: A Neural Approach for POI Recommendation. In SIGKDD.
[186] Lina Yao, an Z Sheng, Anne HH Ngu, and Xue Li. 2016. ings of interest recommendation by leveraging heterogeneous relations in the internet of things. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT) 16, 2 (2016), 9.
[187] Baolin Yi, Xiaoxuan Shen, Zhaoli Zhang, Jiangbo Shu, and Hai Liu. 2016. Expanded autoencoder recommendation framework and its application in movie recommendation. In SKIMA. 298–303.
[188] Haochao Ying, Liang Chen, Yuwen Xiong, and Jian Wu. 2016. Collaborative deep ranking: a hybrid pair-wise recommendation algorithm with implicit feedback. In PAKDD. 555–567.
[189] Haochao Ying, Fuzhen Zhuang, Fuzheng Zhang, Yanchi Liu, Guandong Xu, Xing Xie, Hui Xiong, and Jian Wu. 2018. Sequential Recommender System based on Hierarchical A ention Networks. In IJCAI.
[190] Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Web-Scale Recommender Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01973 (2018).
[191] Wenhui Yu, Huidi Zhang, Xiangnan He, Xu Chen, Li Xiong, and Zheng Qin. 2018. Aesthetic-based clothing recommendation. In WWW. 649–658.
[192] Fuzheng Zhang, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Defu Lian, Xing Xie, and Wei-Ying Ma. 2016. Collaborative knowledge base embedding for recommender systems. In SIGKDD. 353–362.
[193] Qi Zhang, Jiawen Wang, Haoran Huang, Xuanjing Huang, and Yeyun Gong. Hashtag Recommendation for Multimodal Microblog Using Co-A ention Network. In IJCAI.
[194] Shuai Zhang, Yi Tay, Lina Yao, and Aixin Sun. 2018. Next Item Recommendation with Self-A ention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06414 (2018).
[195] Shuai Zhang, Lina Yao, Aixin Sun, Sen Wang, Guodong Long, and Manqing Dong. 2018. NeuRec: On Nonlinear Transformation for Personalized Ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.03002 (2018).
[196] Shuai Zhang, Lina Yao, and Xiwei Xu. 2017. AutoSVD++: An E cient Hybrid Collaborative Filtering Model via Contractive Autoencoders. (2017).
[197] Yongfeng Zhang, Qingyao Ai, Xu Chen, and W Bruce Cro . 2017. Joint representation learning for top-n recommendation with heterogeneous information sources. In CIKM. 1449–1458.
[198] Xiangyu Zhao, Long Xia, Liang Zhang, Zhuoye Ding, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2018. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Page-wise Recommendations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02343 (2018).
[199] Xiangyu Zhao, Liang Zhang, Zhuoye Ding, Long Xia, Jiliang Tang, and Dawei Yin. 2018. Recommendations with Negative Feedback via Pairwise Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06501 (2018).
[200] Guanjie Zheng, Fuzheng Zhang, Zihan Zheng, Yang Xiang, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Xing Xie, and Zhenhui Li. 2018. DRN: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for News Recommendation. In WWW. 167–176.
[201] Lei Zheng, Chun-Ta Lu, Lifang He, Sihong Xie, Vahid Noroozi, He Huang, and Philip S Yu. 2018. MARS: Memory A ention-Aware Recommender System. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07037 (2018).
[202] Lei Zheng, Vahid Noroozi, and Philip S. Yu. 2017. Joint Deep Modeling of Users and Items Using Reviews for Recommendation. In WSDM.
[203] Yin Zheng, Cailiang Liu, Bangsheng Tang, and Hanning Zhou. 2016. Neural Autoregressive Collaborative Filtering for Implicit Feedback. In Recsys.
[204] Yin Zheng, Bangsheng Tang, Wenkui Ding, and Hanning Zhou. 2016. A Neural Autoregressive Approach to Collaborative Filtering. In ICML.
[205] Chang Zhou, Jinze Bai, Junshuai Song, Xiaofei Liu, Zhengchao Zhao, Xiusi Chen, and Jun Gao. 2017. ATRank: An A ention-Based User Behavior Modeling Framework for Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06632 (2017).
[206] Jiang Zhou, Cathal Gurrin, and Rami Albatal. 2016. Applying visual user interest pro les for recommendation & personalisation. (2016).
[207] Fuzhen Zhuang, Dan Luo, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Xing Xie, and Qing He. 2017. Representation Learning with Pair-wise Constraints for Collaborative Ranking. In WSDM. 567–575.
[208] Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiqiang Zhang, Mingda Qian, Chuan Shi, Xing Xie, and Qing He. 2017. Representation learning via Dual-Autoencoder for recommendation. Neural Networks 90 (2017), 83–89.
[209] Yi Zuo, Jiulin Zeng, Maoguo Gong, and Licheng Jiao. 2016. Tag-aware recommender systems based on deep neural networks. Neurocomputing 204 (2016), 51–60.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2018.

