Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Holographic Embeddings of Knowledge Graphs
Maximilian Nickel1,2 and Lorenzo Rosasco1,2,3 and Tomaso Poggio1
1Laboratory for Computational and Statistical Learning and Center for Brains, Minds and Machines Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 2Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy 3DIBRIS, Universita Degli Studi Di Genova, Italy

Abstract
Learning embeddings of entities and relations is an efﬁcient and versatile method to perform machine learning on relational data such as knowledge graphs. In this work, we propose holographic embeddings (HOLE) to learn compositional vector space representations of entire knowledge graphs. The proposed method is related to holographic models of associative memory in that it employs circular correlation to create compositional representations. By using correlation as the compositional operator, HOLE can capture rich interactions but simultaneously remains efﬁcient to compute, easy to train, and scalable to very large datasets. Experimentally, we show that holographic embeddings are able to outperform state-ofthe-art methods for link prediction on knowledge graphs and relational learning benchmark datasets.
Introduction
Relations are a key concept in artiﬁcial intelligence and cognitive science. Many of the structures that humans impose on the world, such as logical reasoning, analogies, or taxonomies, are based on entities, concepts and their relationships. Hence, learning from and with relational knowledge representations has long been considered an important task in artiﬁcial intelligence (see e.g., (Getoor and Taskar 2007; Muggleton 1991; Gentner 1983; Kemp et al. 2006; Xu et al. 2006; Richardson and Domingos 2006)). In this work we are concerned with learning from knowledge graphs (KGs), i.e., knowledge bases which model facts as instances of binary relations (e.g., bornIn(BarackObama, Hawaii)). This form of knowledge representation can be interpreted as a multigraph, where entities correspond to nodes, facts correspond to typed edges, and the type of an edge indicates the kind of the relation. Modern knowledge graphs such as YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) contain billions of facts about millions of entities and have found important applications in question answering, structured search, and digital assistants. Recently, vector space embeddings of knowledge graphs have received considerable attention, as they can be used to create statistical models of entire KGs, i.e., to predict the probability of any possible
Copyright c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

relation instance (edge) in the graph. Such models can be used to derive new knowledge from known facts (link prediction), to disambiguate entities (entity resolution), to extract taxonomies, and for probabilistic question answering (see e.g., (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011; Bordes et al. 2013; Krompaß, Nickel, and Tresp 2014)). Furthermore, embeddings of KGs have been used to support machine reading and to assess the trustworthiness of web sites (Dong et al. 2014; 2015). However, existing embedding models that can capture rich interactions in relational data are often limited in their scalability. Vice versa, models that can be computed efﬁciently are often considerably less expressive. In this work, we approach learning from KGs within the framework of compositional vector space models. We introduce holographic embeddings (HOLE) which use the circular correlation of entity embeddings (vector representations) to create compositional representations of binary relational data. By using correlation as the compositional operator HOLE can capture rich interactions but simultaneously remains efﬁcient to compute, easy to train, and scalable to very large datasets. As we will show experimentally, HOLE is able to outperform state-of-the-art embedding models on various benchmark datasets for learning from KGs. Compositional vector space models have also been considered in cognitive science and natural language processing, e.g., to model symbolic structures, to represent the semantic meaning of phrases, and as models for associative memory (see e.g., (Smolensky 1990; Plate 1995; Mitchell and Lapata 2008; Socher et al. 2012)). In this work, we do not only draw inspiration from these models, but we will also highlight the connections of HOLE to holographic models of associative memory.
Compositional Representations
In this section we introduce compositional vector space models for KGs, the general learning setting, and related work.
Let E denote the set of all entities and P the set of all relation types (predicates) in a domain. A binary relation is a subset Rp ⊆ E × E of all pairs of entities (i.e., those pairs which are in a relation of type p). Higher-arity relations are deﬁned analogously. The characteristic function φp : E × E → {±1} of a relation Rp indicates for each possible pair of entities whether they are part of Rp. We will denote (possible) relation instances as Rp(s, o), where s, o ∈ E denote the ﬁrst and second argument of the asymmetric relation Rp. We will

1955

refer to s, o as subject and object and to Rp(s, o) as triples. Compositional vector space models provide an elegant
way to learn the characteristic functions of the relations in a knowledge graph, as they allow to cast the learning task as a problem of supervised representation learning. Here, we discuss models of the form

Pr(φp(s, o) = 1|Θ) = σ(ηspo) = σ(rp (es ◦ eo)) (1)

where rp ∈ Rdr , ei ∈ Rde are vector representations of relations and entities; σ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(−x)) denotes the logistic function; Θ = {ei}i=1 ne ∪ {rk}k=1 nr denotes the set of all embeddings; ◦ : Rde × Rde → Rdp denotes the
compositional operator which creates a composite vector representation for the pair (s, o) from the embeddings es, eo. We will discuss possible compositional operators below.
Let xi ∈ P × E × E denote a triple, and yi ∈ {±1} denote its label. Given a dataset D = {(xi, yi)}m i=1 of true and false relation instances, we then want to learn representations of entities and relations Θ that best explain D according to
eq. (1). This can, for instance, be done by minimizing the
(regularized) logistic loss

m

min log(1 + exp(−yiηi)) + λ Θ 22.

(2)

Θ

i=1

For relational data, minimizing the logistic loss has the additional advantage that it can help to ﬁnd low dimensional embeddings for complex relational patterns (Bouchard, Singh, and Trouillon 2015). However, in most cases, KGs store only true triples and non-existing triples can be either missing of false (open-world assumption). In this case, negative examples can be generated by heuristics such as the local closed world assumption (Dong et al. 2014). Alternatively, we can use a pairwise ranking loss such as

min

max(0, γ + σ(ηj) − σ(ηi)) (3)

Θ

i∈D+ j∈D−

to rank the probability of existing triples higher than the probability of non-existing ones. Here, D+, D− denote the set of existing and non-existing triples and γ > 0 speciﬁes the width of the margin (Bordes et al. 2011).
An important property of compositional models is that the meaning and representation of entities does not vary with regard to their position in the compositional representation (i.e., the i-th entity has the same representation ei as subject and object). Since the representations of all entities and relations are learned jointly in eqs. (2) and (3), this property allows to propagate information between triples, to capture global dependencies in the data, and to enable the desired relational learning effect. For a review of machine learning on knowledge graphs see also Nickel et al. (2015).
Existing models for knowledge graphs are based on the following compositional operators:

Tensor Product Given entity embeddings a, b ∈ Rd,

tensor product models represent pairs of entities via

a ◦ b = a ⊗ b ∈ Rd2 , i.e, via all pairwise multiplicative interactions between the features of a and b:

[a ⊗ b]ij = aibj .

(4)

Intuitively, a feature in the tuple representation a ⊗ b is “on” (has a high absolute magnitude), if and only if the corresponding features of both entities are “on” (See also ﬁg. 1a). This allows eq. (1) to capture relational patterns such as liberal persons are typically members of liberal parties since a single feature in a ⊗ b can encode that the subject is a liberal person and that the object is a liberal party. Compositional models using the tensor product such as RESCAL (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011) and the Neural Tensor Network (Socher et al. 2013). have shown state-of-the-art performance for learning from KGs. Furthermore, Guu, Miller, and Liang (2015) proposed a RESCAL-based model to learn from paths in KGs. Smolensky (1990) introduced the tensor product as a way to create compositional vector representations. While the tensor product allows to capture rich interactions, its main problem as a compositional operator lies in the fact that it requires a large number of parameters. Since a ⊗ b explicitly models all pairwise interactions, rp in eq. (1) must be of size d2. This can be problematic both in terms of overﬁtting and computational demands. For instance, Nickel, Jiang, and Tresp (2014) showed that linear tensor factorization can require large d to model certain relations. Since rp (es ⊗ eo) = es Rpeo, Yang et al. (2015) proposed to use diagonal Rp’s to reduce the number of parameters. However, this approach can only model symmetric relations and is not suitable to model general knowledge graphs as es Rpeo = eo Rpes for diagonal Rp.

Concatenation, Projection, and Non-Linearity Another
way to compute composite representations is via concatena-
tion, projection and subsequent application of a non-linear function. Let ⊕ : Rd1 × Rd2 → Rd1+d2 denote concatenation and ψ : R → R be a non-linear function such as tanh. The composite tuple representation is then given by a ◦ b = ψ(W (a ⊕ b)) ∈ Rh, such that

[ψ(W (a ⊕ b))]i = ψ

wija aj +

wijb bj

(5)

j

j

where the projection matrix W ∈ Rh×2d is learned in com-

bination with the entity and relation embeddings. Intuitively, a feature in the tuple representation W (a ⊕ b) is “on” if at least one of the corresponding features is “on”. An advan-

tage of this compositional operator is that the mapping from

entity embeddings to representations of pairs is learned adap-

tively via the matrix W . However, the resulting composite

representations are also less rich, as they do not consider

direct interactions of features. As Socher et al. (2013) noted,

the non-linearity ψ provides only weak interactions while

leading to a harder optimization problem. A variant of this

compositional operator which also includes a relation em-

bedding in the composite representation has been used in the

ER-MLP model of the Knowledge Vault (Dong et al. 2014).

Non-compositional Methods Another class of models

does not (explicitly) form compositional representations, but

predicts the existence of triples from the similarity of the

vector space embeddings. In particular, TRANSE (Bordes et

al. 2013) models the score of a fact as the distance between

relation-speciﬁc translations of entity embeddings:

score(Rp(s, o)) = − dist(es + rp, eo) .

(6)

1956

Pr(φp(s, o)) rp

Pr(φp(s, o)) rp

⊗

es0 es1 es2

eo0 eo1 eo2

subject
(a) RESCAL

object

es0 es1 es2

eo0 eo1 eo2

subject
(b) HOLE

object

Figure 1: RESCAL and HOLE as neural networks. RESCAL represents pairs of entities via d2 components (middle layer). In contrast, HOLE requires only d components.

A major appeal of TRANSE is that it requires very few parameters and moreover is easy to train. However, this simplicity comes also at the cost of modeling power. Wang et al. (2014) and Lin et al. (2015) proposed TRANSH and TRANSR respectively, to improve the performance of TRANSE on 1-to-N, N-to-1, and N-to-N relations. Unfortunately, these models lose the simplicity and efﬁciency of TRANSE.

Holographic Embeddings

In this section, we propose a novel compositional model for KGs and relational data. To combine the expressive power of the tensor product with the efﬁciency and simplicity of TRANSE, we use the circular correlation of vectors to represent pairs of entities, i.e., we use the compositional operator:

a ◦ b = a b,

(7)

where : Rd × Rd → Rd denotes circular correlation:1

d−1

[a b]k = aib(k+i) mod d.

(8)

i=0

Hence, we model the probability of a triple as

Pr(φp(s, o) = 1|Θ) = σ(rp (es eo)).

(9)

Due to its connections to holographic models of associative memory (which we will discuss in the next section) we refer to eq. (9) as holographic embeddings (HOLE) of KGs.
As a compositional operator, circular correlation can be interpreted as a compression of the tensor product. While the tensor product assigns a separate component cij = aibj for each pairwise interaction of entity features, in correlation each component corresponds to a sum over a ﬁxed partition of pairwise interactions (see also ﬁg. 2). Intuitively, a feature in the tuple representation is “on” if at least one partition of subject-object-interactions is on. This form of compression can be very effective since it allows to share weights in rp for semantically similar interactions. For example, to model relational patterns in the partyOf relation, it might be sufﬁcient to know whether subject and object are a liberal person and liberal party OR if they are a conservative person and conservative party. These interactions can then be grouped

1For notational convenience, we use zero-indexed vectors.

Table 1: (a) Memory complexity and runtime complexity for compositional representations with ei ∈ Rd. (b) Memory complexity of embedding models.

(a) Compositional Representations

Operator
Tensor Product Circular Correlation

◦ Memory rp
⊗ O(d2) O(d)

Runtime rp (es ◦ eo)
O(d2) O(d log d)

Method
TRANSE TRANSR ER-MLP RESCAL
HOLE

(b) Embedding Models

Memory Complexity
O(ned + nrd) O(ned + nrd + nrd2) O(ned + nrd + dpd) O(ned + nrd2)
O(ned + nrd)

on FB15k

d

Params

100 100 200/200 150

1.6M 15.1M 3.3M 32.5M

200

3.3M

in the same partition. Additionally, it is typically the case that only a subset of all possible interactions of latent features are relevant to model relational patterns. Irrelevant interactions can then be grouped in the same partitions and collectively be assigned a small weight in rp. Please note that the partitioning is not learned but ﬁxed in advance through the correlation operator. This is possible because the entity representations are learned and the latent features can thus be “assigned” to the best partition during learning.
Compared to the tensor product, circular correlation has the important advantage that it does not increase the dimensionality of the composite representation (see also ﬁg. 1b). The memory complexity of the tuple representation is therefore linear in the dimensionality d of the entity representations. Moreover, the runtime complexity is quasilinear (loglinear) in d, as circular correlation can be computed via
a b = F −1 F (a) F (b)
where F (·) and F −1(·) denote the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and its inverse, x denotes the complex conjugate of

1957

b0 b1 b2 a0
a1
a2 c2 c1 c0

c=a b
c0 = a0b0 + a1b1 + a2b2 c1 = a0b2 + a1b0 + a2b1 c2 = a0b1 + a1b2 + a2b0

Figure 2: Circular correlation as compression of the tensor product. Arrows indicate summation patterns, nodes indicate elements in the tensor product. Adapted from (Plate 1995).

x ∈ Cd, and denotes the Hadamard (entrywise) product. The computational complexity of the FFT is O(d log d). Table 1a summarizes the improvements of circular correlation
over the tensor product. Table 1b lists the memory complexity
of HOLE in comparison to other embedding models. Circular convolution ∗ : Rd × Rd → Rd is an operation
that is closely related to circular correlation and deﬁned as

d−1
[a ∗ b]k = aib(k−i) mod d.
i=0

(10)

In comparison to convolution, correlation has two main advantages when used as a compositional operator:

Non Commutative Correlation, unlike convolution, is not commutative, i.e., a b = b a. Non-commutativity is necessary to model asymmetric relations (directed graphs) with compositional representations.
Similiarity Component In the correlation a b, a single component [a b]0 = i aibi corresponds to the dot product a, b . The existence of such a component can be helpful to model relations in which the similarity of entities is important. No such component exists in the convolution a ∗ b (see also ﬁg. 1 in the supplementary material).
To compute the representations for entities and relations, we minimize either eq. (2) or (3) via stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Let θ ∈ {ei}i=1 ne ∪ {rk}k=1 nr denote the embedding of a single entity or relation and let fspo = σ(rp (es eo)). The gradients of eq. (9) are then given by

∂fspo = ∂fspo ∂ηspo , ∂θ ∂ηspo ∂θ

where

∂ηspo = es eo, ∂ηspo = rp eo, ∂ηspo = rp ∗ es.

∂rp

∂es

∂eo

(11)

The partial gradients in eq. (11) follow directly from

rp (es eo) = es (rp eo) = eo (rp ∗ es) (12)
and standard vector calculus. Equation (12) can be derived as follows: First we rewrite correlation in terms of convolution:
a b=a∗b

where a denotes the involution of a, meaning that a is the mirror image of a such that ai = a−i mod d (Scho¨nemann 1987, eq. 2.4). Equation (12) follows then from the following identities in convolution algebra (Plate 1995):
c (a ∗ b) = a (c ∗ b); c (a ∗ b) = b (a ∗ c).
Similar to correlation, the circular convolution in eq. (11) can be computed efﬁciently via a ∗ b = F −1(F (a) F (b)).

Associative Memory
In this section we outline the connections of eq. (9) and eq. (11) to holographic models of associative memory. Such models employ a sequence of convolutions and correlations as used in holography to store and retrieve information (e.g., see (Gabor 1969; Poggio 1973)). In particular, holographic reduced representations (Plate 1995) store the association of a with b via their circular convolution
m = a ∗ b,
and retrieve the item associated with a from m via
b ≈ a m = b ∗ (a a)
If a a ≈ δ (the identity element of convolution), it holds that b ≈ b and we can retrieve a noisy version of b. For denoising, we can pass the retrieved vector through a clean-up memory, which returns the stored item with the highest similarity to the item retrieved from m. For instance, if a = bi = 1, we can perform the clean-up via

b = arg max bi (a m)

(13)

bi

Multiple elements are stored in m via superposition:

m = i ai ∗ bi.
Hence, m acts in this scheme as a memory that stores associations between vectors which are stored and retrieved using
circular convolution and correlation.
Consider now the following model of associative memory for relational data: Let So = {(s, p) | φp(s, o) = 1} be the set of all subject-predicate indices for which the relation Rp(s, o) is true. Next, we store these existing relations via convolution and superposition in the representation eo:

eo =

rp ∗ es

(s,p)∈So

(14)

In this scheme, the compositional representation es eo of eq. (7) would be analogous to retrieving the stored predicates p that exist between s and o. Similarly, computing σ(rp (es eo)) as in eq. (9) is analogous to computing the probability that rp is included in the retrieved relations, i.e., that we have seen the triple Rp(s, o). The norm constraints of eq. (13) can either be enforced directly (by projection the
embeddings onto the unit circle) or through the regularization of the embeddings (which is equivalent to ei ≤ Ce, rk ≤ Cr, where Ce, Cr depend on the regularization parameter).

1958

An important difference of HOLE to associative memory is that it does not only memorize, but it generalizes in a well deﬁned way: In associative memory we are given the embeddings and store the associations directly, typically via Hebbian learning (e.g., see eq. (14)). In HOLE, we do not simply store the associations, but instead learn the embeddings that best explain the observed data. By iterating over D with SGD, we update the embeddings of the objects via
eot+1 ← eot − μ ∂L ∂f (rpt ∗ est ), (15) ∂f ∂η
where μ denotes the learning rate. Please note that eq. (15) is analogous to the association of predicate and subject in holographic associative memory. Hence, we can interpret eq. (15) as adapting the “memory” eo, such that the retrieval of the observed facts is improved. The same analogy holds for the updates of es and rp, however with the roles of correlation and convolution in storage and retrieval reversed. Moreover, in minimizing eq. (2) via eq. (15), we are estimating a probability distribution over possible states of the knowledge graph which allows us to predict the probability of any possible triple in the graph (Nickel et al. 2015).
Experiments
Knowledge Graphs
To evaluate its performance for link prediction on knowledge graphs, we compared HOLE to state-of-the-art models on two commonly used benchmark datasets for this task:
WN18 WordNet is a KG that groups words into synonyms and provides lexical relationships between words. The WN18 dataset consists of a subset of WordNet, containing 40,943 entities, 18 relation types, and 151,442 triples.
FB15k Freebase is a large knowledge graph that stores general facts about the world (e.g., harvested from Wikipedia, MusicBrainz, etc.). The FB15k dataset consists of a subset of Freebase, containing 14,951 entities, 1345 relation types, and 592,213 triples.
For both datasets we used the ﬁxed training-, validation-, and test-splits provided by Bordes et al. (2013). As baseline methods, we used RESCAL, TRANSE, TRANSR, and ER-MLP. To facilitate a fair comparison we reimplemented all models and used the identical loss and optimization method for training, i.e., SGD with AdaGrad (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011) and the ranking loss of eq. (3). This improved the results of TRANSE and RESCAL signiﬁcantly on both datasets compared to results reported by Bordes et al. (2013).2
Following Bordes et al. (2013), we generated negative relation instances for training by corrupting positive triples and used the following evaluation protocol: For each true triple Rp(s, o) in the test set, we replace the subject s with each entity s ∈ E, compute the score for Rp(s , o), and rank all these instances by their scores in decreasing order. Since there can exist multiple true triples in the test set for a given predicate-object pair, we remove all instances from the ranking where Rp(s , o) = 1 and s = s , i.e., we consider only
2TRANSE in its original implementation used SGD without AdaGrad. RESCAL used the least-squares loss and ALS updates.

the ranking of the test instance among all wrong instances (which corresponds to the “Filtered” setting in Bordes et al. (2013)). We then repeat this procedure by replacing the object o. To measure the quality of the ranking, we use the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) which is commonly used in information retrieval and in contrast to mean rank is less sensitive to outliers. In addition to MRR, we report the ratio in which Rp(s, o) occurs within the ﬁrst n results (denoted by “Hits at n”). We optimized the hyperparameters of all models via extensive grid search and selected the model with the best ﬁltered MRR score on the validation set. The results of these experiments are shown in table 2a. It can be seen that HOLE is able to outperform the considered baseline methods signiﬁcantly and consistently on both datasets. For instance, TRANSE and TRANSR rank the test instance only in 11.5% and 33.5% of the cases as the most likely triple in WN18 (Hits at 1). In contrast, HOLE ranks the test instance in 93.0% of the cases as the most likely instance. While less pronounced, similar results can be observed on FB15k. In table 1b, we report the dimensionality d and the resulting number of parameters of the selected models. It can be seen that HOLE is far more efﬁcient in the number of parameters compared to the tensor product model RESCAL. Although the dimensionality d of the HOLE embedding is larger than RESCAL’s (what is to be expected due to the compressive effect of correlation), the overall number of parameters is signiﬁcantly reduced as its memory complexity depends only linearly on d. Also, HOLE is typically very fast to compute. On standard hardware (Intel Core(TM) i7U 2.1GHz) and for d = 150 (as used in the experiments) the runtime to compute the probability of a single triple is around 40μs. To compute all embeddings, a single epoch on WN18 takes around 11s (earlier epochs are slower since more examples violate the margin). Typically, we need 200-500 epochs (depending on the dataset) to arrive at the best estimates for the embeddings.
Relational Learning
We have shown that HOLE can predict triples successfully in knowledge graphs. In additional experiments, we wanted to test the relational learning capabilities of the compositional representation. For this purpose, we used the countries dataset of Bouchard, Singh, and Trouillon (2015), which consists of 244 countries, 22 subregions (e.g., Southern Africa, Western Europe) and 5 regions (e.g., Africa, Americas). Each country is located in exactly one region and subregion, each subregion is located in exactly one region, and each country can have a number of other countries as neighbors. From the raw data we created a relational representation with two predicates: locatedIn(e1, e2) and neighborOf(e1, e2). The task in the experiment was to predict locatedIn(c, r) instances, where c ranges over all countries and r over all regions in the data. The evaluation protocol was the following: First, we split all countries randomly in train (80%), validation (10%), and test (10%) set, such that for each country in the test set there is at least one neighbor in the training set. Next, we removed triples from the test and validation set in three different settings:
S1) In the basic setting we only set locatedIn(c, r) to missing for countries in the test/valid. set. In this setting, the correct

1959

Method
TRANSE TRANSR ER-MLP RESCAL
HOLE

Table 2: Results for link prediction on WordNet (WN18), Freebase (FB15k) and Countries data.

(a)

WN18

MRR

Hits at

Filter Raw 1

3

10

0.495 0.351 11.3 88.8 94.3 0.605 0.427 33.5 87.6 94.0 0.712 0.528 62.6 77.5 86.3 0.890 0.603 84.2 90.4 92.8

0.938 0.616 93.0 94.5 94.9

FB15k

MRR

Hits at

Filter Raw 1

3

10

0.463 0.222 29.7 57.8 74.9 0.346 0.198 21.8 40.4 58.2 0.288 0.155 17.3 31.7 50.1 0.354 0.189 23.5 40.9 58.7

0.524 0.232 40.2 61.3 73.9

Method
Random Frequency ER-MLP RESCAL
HOLE

(b)

Countries

AUC-PR

S1

S2

S3

0.323 0.323 0.960 0.997

0.323 0.323 0.734 0.745

0.323 0.308 0.652 0.650

0.997 0.772 0.697

relations can be predicted from patterns of the form:
locatedIn(c, s) ∧ locatedIn(s, r) ⇒ locatedIn(c, r)
where s refers to the country’s subregion.
S2) In addition to the triples of S1, we set locatedIn(c, s) to missing for all countries c in the test/valid. set and all subregions s in the data. In this setting, the correct triples can be predicted from:
neighborOf(c1, c2) ∧ locatedIn(c2, r) ⇒ locatedIn(c1, r)
This is a harder task than S1, since a country can have multiple neighbors and these can be in different regions.
S3) In addition to the triples of S1 and S2 we set locatedIn(n, r) to missing for all neighbors n of all countries in the test/valid. set and all regions r in the data. In this setting, the correct triples can be predicted from:
neighborOf(c1, c2) ∧ locatedIn(c2, s) ∧ locatedIn(s, r) ⇒ locatedIn(c1, r)
This is the most difﬁcult task, as it not only involves the neighborOf relation, but also a path of length 3.
See ﬁg. 3 for an illustration of the data structure and the test settings. We measured the prediction quality via the area under the precision-recall curve (AUC-PR). The results of the experiments are shown in table 2b. It can be seen that HOLE is very successful in these learning tasks. For S1, the missing triples are predicted nearly perfectly. Moreover, even for the most difﬁcult task S3, HOLE achieves very good results, especially since not every country’s region can be predicted from its neighbors (e.g., islands have no neighbors). The poorer results of RESCAL and ER-MLP can likely be explained with overﬁtting (although the models are regularized), since the difference to HOLE is reduced when the hyperparameters are optimized on the test set instead of the validation set. We observed similar results as in this experiment on commonly used benchmark datasets for statistical relational learning. Due to space constraints, we report these experiments in the supplementary material.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work we proposed HOLE, a compositional vector space model for knowledge graphs that is based on the circular correlation of vectors. An attractive property of circular

Test Country

locatedIn

Region

neighborOf

locatedIn locatedIn
locatedIn

locatedIn Train Country

Subregion

Figure 3: Removed edges in countries experiment: S1) dotted S2) dotted and dashed S3) dotted, dashed and loosely dotted.

correlation in this context is that it creates ﬁxed-width representations, meaning that the compositional representation has the same dimensionality as the representation of its constituents. In HOLE, we exploited this property to create a compositional model that can capture rich interactions in relational data but simultaneously remains efﬁcient to compute, easy to train, and very scalable. Experimentally we showed that HOLE provides state-of-the-art performance on a variety of benchmark datasets and that it can model complex relational patterns while being very economical in the number of its parameters. Moreover, we highlighted connections of HOLE to holographic models of associative memory and discussed how it can be interpreted in this context. This creates not only a link between relational learning and associative memory, but also allows for principled ways to query the model, for instance in question answering. In future work we plan to further exploit the ﬁxed-width representations of holographic embeddings in complex scenarios, since they are especially suitable to model higher-arity relations (e.g., taughtAt(John, AI, MIT)) and facts about facts (e.g., believes(John, loves(Tom, Mary))).
Acknowledgments & Reproducibility
This material is based upon work supported by the Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216. The code for models and experiments used in this paper is available at https://github.com/mnick/ holographic-embeddings.

1960

References
Auer, S.; Bizer, C.; Kobilarov, G.; Lehmann, J.; Cyganiak, R.; and Ives, Z. 2007. DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data. In The Semantic Web, volume 4825 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. 722–735.
Bollacker, K.; Evans, C.; Paritosh, P.; Sturge, T.; and Taylor, J. 2008. Freebase: A Collaboratively Created Graph Database for Structuring Human Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, 1247–1250.
Bordes, A.; Weston, J.; Collobert, R.; and Bengio, Y. 2011. Learning Structured Embeddings of Knowledge Bases. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Bordes, A.; Usunier, N.; Garcia-Duran, A.; Weston, J.; and Yakhnenko, O. 2013. Translating Embeddings for Modeling Multi-Relational Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2787–2795.
Bouchard, G.; Singh, S.; and Trouillon, T. 2015. On Approximate Reasoning Capabilities of Low-Rank Vector Spaces. In 2015 AAAI Spring Symposium Series.
Dong, X.; Gabrilovich, E.; Heitz, G.; Horn, W.; Lao, N.; Murphy, K.; Strohmann, T.; Sun, S.; and Zhang, W. 2014. Knowledge Vault: A Web-scale Approach to Probabilistic Knowledge Fusion. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 601–610. ACM.
Dong, X. L.; Gabrilovich, E.; Murphy, K.; Dang, V.; Horn, W.; Lugaresi, C.; Sun, S.; and Zhang, W. 2015. Knowledgebased Trust: Estimating the Trustworthiness of Web Sources. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 8(9):938–949.
Duchi, J.; Hazan, E.; and Singer, Y. 2011. Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online Learning and Stochastic Optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 12:2121– 2159.
Gabor, D. 1969. Associative Holographic Memories. IBM Journal of Research and Development 13(2):156–159.
Gentner, D. 1983. Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical Framework for Analogy. Cognitive Science 7(2):155–170.
Getoor, L., and Taskar, B. 2007. Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning. The MIT Press.
Guu, K.; Miller, J.; and Liang, P. 2015. Traversing Knowledge Graphs in Vector Space. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Kemp, C.; Tenenbaum, J. B.; Grifﬁths, T. L.; Yamada, T.; and Ueda, N. 2006. Learning Systems of Concepts with an Inﬁnite Relational Model. In Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 381–388.
Krompaß, D.; Nickel, M.; and Tresp, V. 2014. Querying Factorized Probabilistic Triple Databases. In The Semantic Web–ISWC 2014. Springer Int. Publishing. 114–129.
Lin, Y.; Liu, Z.; Sun, M.; Liu, Y.; and Zhu, X. 2015. Learning Entity and Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Graph Completion. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Mitchell, J., and Lapata, M. 2008. Vector-based Models of Semantic Composition. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, 236–244.
Muggleton, S. 1991. Inductive Logic Programming. New generation computing 8(4):295–318.
Nickel, M.; Murphy, K.; Tresp, V.; and Gabrilovich, E. 2015. A Review of Relational Machine Learning for Knowledge Graphs. To appear in Proceedings of the IEEE. arXiv:1503.00759.
Nickel, M.; Jiang, X.; and Tresp, V. 2014. Reducing the Rank in Relational Factorization Models by Including Observable Patterns. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27. Curran Associates, Inc. 1179–1187.
Nickel, M.; Tresp, V.; and Kriegel, H.-P. 2011. A Three-Way Model for Collective Learning on Multi-Relational Data. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, 809–816.
Plate, T. 1995. Holographic Reduced Representations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 6(3):623–641.
Poggio, T. 1973. On Holographic Models of Memory. Kybernetik 12(4):237–238.
Richardson, M., and Domingos, P. 2006. Markov Logic Networks. Machine learning 62(1-2):107–136.
Scho¨nemann, P. 1987. Some algebraic relations between involutions, convolutions, and correlations, with applications to holographic memories. Biological Cybernetics 56(5-6):367– 374.
Smolensky, P. 1990. Tensor Product Variable Binding and the Representation of Symbolic Structures in Connectionist Systems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 46(1):159–216.
Socher, R.; Huval, B.; Manning, C. D.; and Ng, A. Y. 2012. Semantic Compositionality through Recursive Matrix-Vector Spaces. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning, 1201–1211.
Socher, R.; Chen, D.; Manning, C. D.; and Ng, A. Y. 2013. Reasoning with Neural Tensor Networks for Knowledge Base Completion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26. Curran Associates, Inc. 926–934.
Suchanek, F. M.; Kasneci, G.; and Weikum, G. 2007. Yago: A Core of Semantic Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web, 697–706.
Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Feng, J.; and Chen, Z. 2014. Knowledge Graph Embedding by Translating on Hyperplanes. In TwentyEighth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Xu, Z.; Tresp, V.; Yu, K.; and Kriegel, H. 2006. Inﬁnite Hidden Relational Models. In In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Uncertainity in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Yang, B.; Yih, W.; He, X.; Gao, J.; and Deng, L. 2015. Embedding Entities and Relations for Learning and Inference in Knowledge Bases. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2015.

1961

