OpenKE: An Open Toolkit for Knowledge Embedding

Xu Han1,2,3∗ Shulin Cao2,3,4,5∗

Xin Lv1,4

Yankai Lin1,2,3

Zhiyuan Liu1,2,3† Maosong Sun1,2,3

Juanzi Li1,4

1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

2Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

3State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

4Knowledge Engineering Laboratory, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

5College of Information Science and Technology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China

Abstract
We release an open toolkit for knowledge embedding (OpenKE), which provides a uniﬁed framework and various fundamental models to embed knowledge graphs into a continuous low-dimensional space. OpenKE prioritizes operational efﬁciency to support quick model validation and large-scale knowledge representation learning. Meanwhile, OpenKE maintains sufﬁcient modularity and extensibility to easily incorporate new models into the framework. Besides the toolkit, the embeddings of some existing large-scale knowledge graphs pre-trained by OpenKE are also available, which can be directly applied for many applications including information retrieval, personalized recommendation and question answering. The toolkit, documentation, and pre-trained embeddings are all released on http://openke.thunlp.org/.
1 Introduction
People construct various large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) to organize structured knowledge about the world, such as WordNet (Miller, 1995), Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008) and Wikidata (Vrandecˇic´ and Kro¨tzsch, 2014). Most KGs are typically organized in the form of triples (h, r, t), with h and t indicating head and tail entities, and r indicating the relation between h and t, e.g., (Mark Twain, PlaceOfBirth, Florida). Abundant structured information in KGs is widely used to enhance various knowledge-driven NLP applications (e.g., information retrieval, question answering and dialogue system) with the ongoing effective construction of KGs.
Limited by the scale and sparsity of KGs, we have to represent KGs with corresponding distributed representations. Therefore, a variety of
∗ indicates equal contribution † Corresponding author: Z.Liu(liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)

knowledge embedding (KE) approaches have been proposed to embed both entities and relations in KGs into a continuous low-dimensional space, such as linear models (Bordes et al., 2011, 2012, 2014), latent factor models (Sutskever et al., 2009; Jenatton et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2017), neural models (Socher et al., 2013; Dong et al., 2014), matrix factorization models (Nickel et al., 2011, 2012, 2016; Trouillon et al., 2016), and translation models (Bordes et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015; Ji et al., 2015).
These models have achieved great performance on benchmark datasets. However, there exist two main issues which may lead to difﬁculty in full utilization and further development. On the one hand, the existing implementations are scattered and unsystematic to some extent. For example, the interfaces of these model implementations are inconsistent with each other. On the other hand, these model implementations mainly focus on model validation and are often time-consuming, which makes it difﬁcult to apply them for realworld applications. Hence, it becomes urgent to develop an efﬁcient and effective open toolkit for KE, which will deﬁnitely beneﬁt both the communities in academia and industry. For this purpose, we develop an open KE toolkit named “OpenKE“. The toolkit provides a ﬂexible framework and uniﬁed interfaces for developing KE models. While taking in some training and computing optimization methods, OpenKE makes KE models efﬁcient and capable of embedding large-scale KGs. The features of OpenKE are threefold:
(1) At the data and memory level, the uniﬁed framework of OpenKE manages data and memory for KE models. Model developments based on OpenKE no longer require complicated data processing and memory allocation.
(2) At the algorithm level, OpenKE uniﬁes the mathematical forms of various speciﬁc models to

139
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (System Demonstrations), pages 139–144 Brussels, Belgium, October 31–November 4, 2018. c 2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Model RESCAL (Nickel et al., 2011) TransE (Bordes et al., 2013) TransH (Wang et al., 2014) TransR (Lin et al., 2015)
TransD (Ji et al., 2015)
DistMult (Yang et al., 2015) HolE (Nickel et al., 2016) ComplEx (Trouillon et al., 2016)

Scoring Function h Mrt − h + r − t L1/L2 − (h − wr hwr) + r − (t − wr twr) L1/L2 − Mrh + r − Mrt L1/L2

− (rphp + I)h + r − (rptp + I)t L1/L2

< h, r, t > r F −1 F (h)

F (t)

(< h, r, t >)

Parameters Mr ∈ Rk×k, h ∈ Rk, t ∈ Rk r ∈ Rk, h ∈ Rk, t ∈ Rk wr ∈ Rk, r ∈ Rk, h ∈ Rk, t ∈ Rk Mr ∈ Rkr×ke , r ∈ Rkr , h ∈ Rke , t ∈ Rke rp ∈ Rkr , hp ∈ Rke , tp ∈ Rke , I ∈ Rkr×ke , r ∈ Rkr , h ∈ Rke , t ∈ Rke r ∈ Rk, h ∈ Rk, t ∈ Rk
r ∈ Rk, h ∈ Rk, t ∈ Rk
r ∈ Ck, h ∈ Ck, t ∈ Ck

Loss Function margin-based loss margin-based loss margin-based loss margin-based loss
margin-based loss logistic loss logistic loss logistic loss

Table 1: The brief introduction of some typical KE models. For most models, k is the dimension of both entities and relations. For some other models, Ke is the dimension of entities and kr is the dimension of relations. F denotes the Fourier transform. denotes the element-wise product. < a, b, c > denotes the element-wise multi-linear dot product.

implement them under the uniﬁed framework. We also propose a novel negative sampling strategy for further acceleration.
(3) At the computation level, OpenKE can separate a large-scale KG into several parts and adapt KE models for parallel training. Based on the underlying management of data and memory, we also adopt TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) to build a convenient platform to run models on GPUs.
Besides the toolkit, we also provide the pretrained embeddings of several well-known largescale KGs, which can be used directly for other relevant works without repeatedly spending much time for embedding KGs. In this paper, we mainly present the architecture design and implementation of OpenKE, as well as the benchmark evaluation results of some typical KE models implemented with OpenKE. Other related resources and details can be found on http://openke. thunlp.org/.

deﬁne a scoring function S(h, r, t) for each triple (h, r, t). In most cases, there are only true triples in KGs and non-existing triples can be either false or missing. Local closed world assumption (Dong et al., 2014) has been proposed to solve this problem, which requires existing triples to have higher scores than those non-existing ones. Hence, the scoring function S(h, r, t) returns a higher score if (h, r, t) is true, vice versa.
Based on the above-mentioned scoring functions, some KE models formalize a margin-based loss as the training objective to learn embeddings of the entities and relations:

L=

γ + S(t ) − S(t) +.

(1)

t∈T t ∈T

Here [x]+ indicates keeping the positive part of x and γ > 0 is a margin. T denotes the set of nonexisting triples, which is constructed by corrupting entities and relations in existing triples,

2 Background
For a typical KG G, it expresses data as a directed graph G = {E, R, T }, where E, R and T indicate the sets of entities, relations and facts respectively. Each triple (h, r, t) ∈ T indicates there is a relation r ∈ R between h ∈ E and t ∈ E. For the entities h, t ∈ E and the relation r ∈ R, we use the bold face h, t, r to indicate their low-dimensional vectors respectively.
For any entity pair (h, t) ∈ E × E and any relation r ∈ R, we can determine whether there is a fact (h, r, t) ∈ T via their low-dimensional embeddings learned by KE models. These embeddings greatly facilitate understanding and mining knowledge in KGs. In practice, the KE models

T =E×R×E−T.

(2)

Some other KE models cast the training objective as a classiﬁcation task. The embeddings of the entities and relations can be learned by minimizing the regularized logistic loss,

L = log(1 + exp(−S(t))) +

log(1 + exp(S(t ))).

t∈T

t ∈T

(3)

The main difference among various KE models

is scoring functions. Hence, we brieﬂy introduce

several typical models and their scoring functions

in Table 1. These models are state-of-the-art and

widely introduced in many works. We systemati-

cally incorporate all of them into our OpenKE.

140

3 Design Goals
Before introducing the concrete toolkit implementations, we report the design goals and features of OpenKE, including system encapsulation, operational efﬁciency, and model extensibility.
3.1 Encapsulation
Developers tend to maximize the reuse of code to avoid unnecessary redundant development in practice. For KE, its task is ﬁxed, and its experimental settings and model parameters are also similar. However, previous model implementations are scattered and lack of necessary interface encapsulation. Thus, developers have to spend extra time reading obscure open-source code and writing glue code for data processing when they construct models. In view of this issue, we build a uniﬁed underlying platform in OpenKE and encapsulate various data and memory processing which is independent of model implementations. As is shown in Figure 1, the system encapsulation makes it easy to train and test KE models. Thus, we just need to set hyperparameters via interfaces of the platform to construct KE models.
3.2 Efﬁciency
Previous model implementations focus on model validation and enhancing experimental results rather than improving time and space efﬁciency. In fact, as real-world KGs can be very large, training efﬁciency is an important concern. Hence, OpenKE integrates efﬁcient computing power, training methods, and various acceleration strategies to support KE models. We adopt TensorFlow and PyTorch to implement the model training and test modules based on the interfaces of underlying platform. These machine learning frameworks enable models to be run on GPU, with just few minutes needed for training and testing models on benchmark datasets. In order to train existing large-scale KGs, we also implement lightweight C/C++ versions for quick deployment and multithreading acceleration of KE models, in which some models (e.g. TransE) can embed more than 100M triples in a few hours on ordinary devices.
3.3 Extensibility
Since different KE models have different design solutions, we make OpenKE fully extensible to future variants. For the underlying platform, we encapsulate data processing and memory manage-

Code
import config, Models, os os.environ['CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES']='0' con = config.Config() con.set_in_path('./FB15K/')
con.set_work_threads(8) con.set_train_times(1000) con.set_alpha(0.001) con.set_margin(1.0) con.set_dimension(100) con.set_opt_method('SGD')
con.init() con.set_model(models.TransE) con.run()

OpenKE
Underlying Management

Datasets

Memory

Model Settings

Model Parameters

Training Strategies

Traning and Evaluation

Training

Evaluation

Figure 1: An example for training a KE model (TransE) via OpenKE.

import numpy as np import tensorflow as tf

Model

from Model import *

class TransE(Model):

def _calc(self, h, t, r):

return abs(h + r - t)

def embedding_def(self): config = self.get_config()

DistMult

DistMult

self.ent_embeddings = tf.get_variable('ent_embeddings',

[config.entTotal, config.hidden_size])

self.rel_embeddings = tf.get_variable('rel_embeddings',

[config.relTotal, config.hidden_size])

Embeddings

...

def loss_def(self):

config = self.get_config()

pos_h, pos_t, pos_r = self.get_positive_instance(in_batch = True)

neg_h, neg_t, neg_r = self.get_negative_instance(in_batch = True) Loss p_h = tf.nn.embedding_lookup(self.ent_embeddings, pos_h)

p_t = tf.nn.embedding_lookup(self.ent_embeddings, pos_t)

p_r = tf.nn.embedding_lookup(self.rel_embeddings, pos_r)

n_h = tf.nn.embedding_lookup(self.ent_embeddings, neg_h)

n_t = tf.nn.embedding_lookup(self.ent_embeddings, neg_t)

n_r = tf.nn.embedding_lookup(self.rel_embeddings, neg_r)

_p_score = self._calc(p_h, p_t, p_r)

_n_score = self._calc(n_h, n_t, n_r)

p_score = tf.reduce_sum(tf.reduce_mean(_p_score, 1, keep_dims = False),

1, keep_dims = True)

n_score = tf.reduce_sum(tf.reduce_mean(_n_score, 1, keep_dims = False),

1, keep_dims = True)

self.loss = tf.reduce_sum(tf.maximum(p_score - n_score + config.margin, 0))

...

TransE

Figure 2: An example for implementing a KE model (TransE) via OpenKE.

ment, and then provide various data sampling interfaces. For the training modules, we provide enough interfaces for possible training methods. For the construction of KE models, we unify their mathematical forms and encapsulate them into a base class. These framework designs can greatly meet the needs of current and future models, and customized interfaces to meet individual requirements are also available in OpenKE. As shown in Figure 2, all speciﬁc models are implemented by inheriting the base class with designing their own scoring functions and loss functions. In addition, models in OpenKE can be placed into the framework of TensorFlow and PyTorch to interact with other machine learning models.
4 Implementations
In this section, we mainly present the implementations of acceleration modules and special sampling algorithm in OpenKE. OpenKE has been available to the public on GitHub 1 and is opensource under the MIT license.
1http://github.com/thunlp/OpenKE

141

Algorithm 1 Parallel Learning

Require: Entity and relation sets E and R, training

T = {(h, r, t)}.

1: Initialize all model embeddings and parameters.

2: for i ← 1 to epoches do

3: In each thread:

4: for j ← 1 to batches/threads do

5:

Sample a positive triple (h, r, t)

6:

Sample a corrupted triple (h , r , t )

7:

Compute the loss function L

8:

Update the gradient ∇L

9: end for

10: end for

11: Return all embeddings and parameters

triples

4.1 GPU Learning
GPUs are widely used in machine learning tasks to speed up model training in recent years. In order to accelerate KE models, we integrate GPU learning mechanisms into OpenKE. We build the GPU learning platform based on TensorFlow (branch master) and PyTorch (branch OpenKE-PyTorch). Both TensorFlow and PyTorch are machine learning libraries, providing effective hardware optimizations and abundant arithmetic operators for convenient model constructions, especially the stable environments for GPU learning. The autograd packages also bring additional convenience. TensorFlow and PyTorch enable us to coustruct models without manual back propagation implementations, further reducing the programming complexity for GPU Learning. We develop necessary encapsulation modules aligning to TensorFlow and PyTorch so that the development and deployment of KE models can be faster and further convenient. Models can be deployed easily on a variety of devices without implementing complicated device setting code, even for multiple GPUs.
4.2 Parallel Learning
Abundant computing resources (e.g Servers with multiple GPUs) do not exist all the time. In fact, we often rely on simple personal computers for model validation. Hence, we enable OpenKE to adapt models for parallel learning on CPU 2 besides employing GPU learning, which allow users to make full use of all available computing resources. The parallel learning method is shown in Algorithm 1. The main idea of parallel learning method is based on data parallelism mechanism, which divides training triples into several parts and trains each part of triples with a corresponding
2https://github.com/thunlp/Fast-TransX

t1 r
h r
r t2
t3

t

0

f [t] 0

t1-1 t1 t1+1

t1-1 ×

t1

|E| |E|-3

(h, r, t1) (h, r, f -1[rand(0, |E| - 3)])

Figure 3: An example for the offset-based negative sampling algorithm.

thread. In parallel learning, there are two strategies implemented to update gradients. One of the methods is the lock-free strategy, which means all threads share the uniﬁed embedding space and update embeddings directly without synchronized operations. We also implement a central synchronized method, where each thread calculates its own gradient and results will be updated after summing up the gradients from all threads.
4.3 Offset-based Negative Sampling
All KE models learn their parameters by minimizing the margin-based loss function Eq. (1) or the regularized logistic loss Eq. (3). Both of these loss functions need to construct non-existing triples as negative samples. We have empirically found that the corrupted triples have great inﬂuence on ﬁnal performance. Randomly replacing entities or relations with any other ones may make the negative triple set T contain some positive triples in T , which would weaken the performance of KE models. The original sampling algorithm will spend much time checking whether generated triples are in T and ﬁltering them out. In OpenKE, we propose an offset-based negative sampling algorithm to generate negative triples. As shown in Figure 3, we renumber all entities with new serial numbers. Each entity’s new number is obtained by adding an offset to its original ID, and the offset is the total number of positive entities which have lower IDs. Our algorithm ﬁrst randomly sample a new number and then map the new number back to its corresponding entity. This algorithm can directly generate negative triples without any checking. Since the relation set is very small, we still directly replace positive relations for relation corruption.
5 Evaluations
Link prediction has been widely used for evaluating KE models, which needs to predict the tail entity when given a triple (h, r, ?) or predict the

142

Dataset
FB15K WN18

Rel
1,345 18

Ent
14,951 40,943

Train
483,142 141,442

Valid
50,000 5,000

Test
59,071 5,000

Table 2: Statistics of FB15K and WN18.

Datasets Models
TransE TransH TransR TransD RESCAL DistMult HolE ComplEx

TF
75.6(+28.5) 72.8(+14.3) 74.9(+6.2) 74.3(+0.1) 49.1(+5.0) 73.4(+15.7) 70.4(−3.5) 72.3(−11.7)

FB15K PT
75.4(+28.3) 72.7(+14.2) 75.7(+7.0) 74.2(+0.0) 57.2(+13.1) 75.4(+17.4)
80.5(−3.5)

MT
74.3(+27.2) 74.8(+16.3) 75.6(+6.9) 75.2(+1.0)
-

Table 3: Experimental results of link prediction on FB15K (%).

Datasets Models
TransE TransH TransR TransD RESCAL DistMult HolE ComplEx

TF
90.5(+1.3) 94.6(+7.9) 93.8(+1.8) 94.2(+1.7) 80.2(+27.4) 93.6(−0.6) 94.4(−0.5) 94.0(−0.7)

WN18 PT
90.0(+0.8) 94.4(+7.7) 94.4(+2.4) 94.3(+1.8) 80.2(+27.4) 93.6(−0.6)
94.0(−0.7)

MT
83.3(−5.9) 92.5(+5.8) 94.6(+2.9) 91.9(−0.3)
-

Table 4: Experimental results of link prediction on WN18 (%).

Models
TransE (KB2E, CPU) TransE (OpenKE, CPU, 1-Thread) TransE (OpenKE, CPU, 2-Thread ) TransE (OpenKE, CPU, 4-Thread) TransE (OpenKE, CPU, 8-Thread) TransE (OpenKE, GPU, TensorFlow) TransE (OpenKE, GPU, PyTorch)

Time (s)
7124 386 206 118 76 178 266

head entity when given a triple (?, r, t). In order to evaluate OpenKE, we implement various KE models with OpenKE, and compare their performance with previous works on link prediction task.
Some datasets are usually used as benchmarks for link prediction, such as FB15K and WN18. FB15K is the relatively dense subgraph of Freebase; WN18 is the subset of WordNet. These public datasets are available online 3. Following previous works, We adopt them in our experiments. The statistics of FB15K and WN18 are listed in Table 2, including the number of entities, relations, and facts.
As mentioned above, OpenKE supports models with efﬁcient learning on both CPU and GPU. For CPU, the benchmarks are run on an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6700K @ 3.70GHz, with 4 cores and 8 threads. For GPU, the models in both TensorFlow and PyTorch versions are trained by GeForce GTX 1070 (Pascal), with CUDA v.8.0 (driver 384.111) and cuDNN v.6.5. To compare with the previous works, we simply follow the parameter settings used before and traverse all training triples for 1000 rounds. Other detailed parameters and training strategies are shown in our source code. We show these results in Table 3 and Table 4. In these tables, the difference between our implementations and the paper reported results are listed in the parentheses. To demonstrate the efﬁciency of OpenKE, we select TransE as a representative and implement it with both OpenKE and KB2E 4, and then compare their training time. KB2E is a widely-used toolkit for KE models on GitHub. These results can be found in Table 5.
3https://everest.hds.utc.fr/doku.php? id=en:transe
4https://github.com/thunlp/KB2E

Table 5: Training time of different implementations of TransE on FB15K.
From the results in Table 3, Table 4 and Table 5, we observe that: (1) Models implemented with OpenKE have the comparable accuracies compared to the values reported in the original papers. These results are compatible with our expectations. For some models, their accuracies are slightly higher due to OpenKE. These results indicate our toolkit is effecive. (2) OpenKE signiﬁcantly accelerates the training process of the models trained both on CPU and GPU. As compared to the model implemented with KB2E, all models in OpenKE achieve more than 10× speedup. These results show that our toolkit is efﬁcient.
The evaluation results indicate that our toolkit signiﬁcantly handles the time-consuming problem and can support existing models to learn largescale KGs. In fact, TransE based on OpenKE only spends about 18 hours training the whole Wikidata for 10000 rounds and gets stable embeddings. There are more than 40M entities and 100M facts in Wikidata. We also evaluate the embeddings learned on the whole Wikidata on the link prediction task. Because the whole Wikidata is quite huge, we emphasize link prediction of Wikidata more on ranking a set of candidate entities rather than requiring one best answer. Hence, we report the proportion of correct entities in top-N ranked entities (Hits@10, Hits@20, Hits@50 and Hits@100) in Table 6. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that adopting KE models to embed an existing large-scale KG. The results shown in Table 6 indicate that OpenKE enables models to effectively and efﬁciently embed large-scale KGs.

143

Metric
Head Tail

Hits@10
29.6 66.8

Hits@20
36.2 75.2

Hits@50
46.7 84.9

Hits@100
56.3 90.6

Table 6: Experimental results of link prediction on the whole Wikidata.

6 Conclusion
We propose an efﬁcient open toolkit OpenKE for knowledge embedding. OpenKE builds a uniﬁed underlying platform to organize data and memory. It also applies GPU learning and parallel learning to speed up training. We also unify mathematical forms for speciﬁc models and encapsulate them to maintain enough modularity and extensibility. Experimental results demonstrate that the models implemented by OpenKE are efﬁcient and effective. In the future, we will incorporate more knowledge embedding models and maintain the stable embeddings of some large-scale knowledge graphs.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the 973 Program (No. 2014CB340501) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC No. 61572273, 61661146007) and Tsinghua University Initiative Scientiﬁc Research Program (20151080406). This research is part of the NExT++ project, supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Ministers Ofﬁce, Singapore under its IRC@Singapore Funding Initiative.
References
Mart´ın Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. 2016. Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In Proceedings of OSDI.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a collaboratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of KDD.
Antoine Bordes, Xavier Glorot, Jason Weston, and Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Joint learning of words and meaning representations for open-text semantic parsing. In Proceedings of AISTATS.
Antoine Bordes, Xavier Glorot, Jason Weston, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. A semantic matching energy function for learning with multi-relational data. Proceedings of ML.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In Proceedings of NIPS.

Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, Ronan Collobert, Yoshua Bengio, et al. 2011. Learning structured embeddings of knowledge bases. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Xin Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Geremy Heitz, Wilko Horn, Ni Lao, Kevin Murphy, Thomas Strohmann, Shaohua Sun, and Wei Zhang. 2014. Knowledge vault: A web-scale approach to probabilistic knowledge fusion. In Proceedings of KDD.
Rodolphe Jenatton, Nicolas L Roux, Antoine Bordes, and Guillaume R Obozinski. 2012. A latent factor model for highly multi-relational data. In Proceedings of NIPS.
Guoliang Ji, Shizhu He, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2015. Knowledge graph embedding via dynamic mapping matrix. In Proceedings of ACL.
Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu. 2015. Learning entity and relation embeddings for knowledge graph completion. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Hanxiao Liu, Yuexin Wu, and Yiming Yang. 2017. Analogical inference for multi-relational embeddings. In Proceedings of ICML.
George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM.
Maximilian Nickel, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Tomaso Poggio. 2016. Holographic embeddings of knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter Kriegel. 2011. A three-way model for collective learning on multirelational data. In Proceedings of ICML.
Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter Kriegel. 2012. Factorizing yago: scalable machine learning for linked data. In Proceedings of WWW.
Adam Paszke, Soumith Chintala, Ronan Collobert, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Samy Bengio, Iain Melvin, Jason Weston, and Johnny Mariethoz. 2017. Pytorch: Tensors and dynamic neural networks in python with strong gpu acceleration.
Richard Socher, Danqi Chen, Christopher D Manning, and Andrew Ng. 2013. Reasoning with neural tensor networks for knowledge base completion. In Proceedings of NIPS.
Ilya Sutskever, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2009. Modelling relational data using bayesian clustered tensor factorization. In Proceedings of NIPS.
The´o Trouillon, Johannes Welbl, Sebastian Riedel, E´ ric Gaussier, and Guillaume Bouchard. 2016. Complex embeddings for simple link prediction. In Proceedings of ICML.
Denny Vrandecˇic´ and Markus Kro¨tzsch. 2014. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communications of the ACM.
Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. 2014. Knowledge graph embedding by translating on hyperplanes. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. 2015. Embedding entities and relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases. In Proceedings of ICLR.

144

