Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey
ROBERTO NAVIGLI
Universita` di Roma La Sapienza
Word sense disambiguation (WSD) is the ability to identify the meaning of words in context in a computational manner. WSD is considered an AI-complete problem, that is, a task whose solution is at least as
solving the ambiguity of words and provide a description of the task. We overview supervised, unsupervised, hard as the most difﬁcult problems in artiﬁcial intelligence. We introduce the reader to the motivations for 10
and knowledge-based approaches. The assessment of WSD systems is discussed in the context of the Senseval/Semeval campaigns, aiming at the objective evaluation of systems participating in several different disambiguation tasks. Finally, applications, open problems, and future directions are discussed.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: I.2.7 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing—Text analysis; I.2.4 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Knowledge Representation Formalisms and Methods General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation, Measurement, Performance Additional Key Words and Phrases: Word sense disambiguation, word sense discrimination, WSD, lexical semantics, lexical ambiguity, sense annotation, semantic annotation ACM Reference Format: Navigli, R. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 41, 2, Article 10 (February 2009), 69 pages DOI = 10.1145/1459352.1459355 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1459352.1459355
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Motivation
Human language is ambiguous, so that many words can be interpreted in multiple ways depending on the context in which they occur. For instance, consider the following sentences:
(a) I can hear bass sounds. (b) They like grilled bass.
The occurrences of the word bass in the two sentences clearly denote different meanings: low-frequency tones and a type of ﬁsh, respectively.
Unfortunately, the identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc meaning that a word assumes in context is only apparently simple. While most of the time humans do not even think
This work was partially funded by the Interop NoE (508011) 6th EU FP. Author’s address: R. Navigli, Dipartimento di Informatica, Universita` di Roma La Sapienza, Via Salaria, 113-00198 Rome, Italy; email: navigli@di.uniroma1.it. Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212) 8690481, or permissions@acm.org. c 2009 ACM 0360-0300/2009/02-ART10 $5.00. DOI 10.1145/1459352.1459355 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/ 1459352.1459355
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:2

R. Navigli

about the ambiguities of language, machines need to process unstructured textual information and transform them into data structures which must be analyzed in order to determine the underlying meaning. The computational identiﬁcation of meaning for words in context is called word sense disambiguation (WSD). For instance, as a result of disambiguation, sentence (b) above should be ideally sense-tagged as “They like/ENJOY grilled/COOKED bass/FISH.”
WSD has been described as an AI-complete problem [Mallery 1988], that is, by analogy to NP-completeness in complexity theory, a problem whose difﬁculty is equivalent to solving central problems of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), for example, the Turing Test [Turing 1950]. Its acknowledged difﬁculty does not originate from a single cause, but rather from a variety of factors.
First, the task lends itself to different formalizations due to fundamental questions, like the approach to the representation of a word sense (ranging from the enumeration of a ﬁnite set of senses to rule-based generation of new senses), the granularity of sense inventories (from subtle distinctions to homonyms), the domain-oriented versus unrestricted nature of texts, the set of target words to disambiguate (one target word per sentence vs. “all-words” settings), etc.
Second, WSD heavily relies on knowledge. In fact, the skeletal procedure of any WSD system can be summarized as follows: given a set of words (e.g., a sentence or a bag of words), a technique is applied which makes use of one or more sources of knowledge to associate the most appropriate senses with words in context. Knowledge sources can vary considerably from corpora (i.e., collections) of texts, either unlabeled or annotated with word senses, to more structured resources, such as machinereadable dictionaries, semantic networks, etc. Without knowledge, it would be impossible for both humans and machines to identify the meaning, for example, of the above sentences.
Unfortunately, the manual creation of knowledge resources is an expensive and timeconsuming effort [Ng 1997], which must be repeated every time the disambiguation scenario changes (e.g., in the presence of new domains, different languages, and even sense inventories). This is a fundamental problem which pervades the ﬁeld of WSD, and is called the knowledge acquisition bottleneck [Gale et al. 1992b].
The hardness of WSD is also attested by the lack of applications to real-world tasks. The exponential growth of the Internet community, together with the fast pace development of several areas of information technology (IT), has led to the production of a vast amount of unstructured data, such as document warehouses, Web pages, collections of scientiﬁc articles, blog corpora, etc. As a result, there is an increasing urge to treat this mass of information by means of automatic methods. Traditional techniques for text mining and information retrieval show their limits when they are applied to such huge collections of data. In fact, these approaches, mostly based on lexicosyntactic analysis of text, do not go beyond the surface appearance of words and, consequently, fail in identifying relevant information formulated with different wordings and in discarding documents which are not pertinent to the user needs. Text disambiguation can potentially provide a major breakthrough in the treatment of large-scale amounts of data, thus constituting a fundamental contribution to the realization of the so-called semantic Web, “an extension of the current Web, in which information is given well-deﬁned meaning, better enabling computers and people to work in cooperation” [Berners-Lee et al. 2001, page 2].
The potential of WSD is also clear when we deal with the problem of machine translation: for instance, the Italian word penna can be translated in English as feather, pen, or author depending upon the context. There are thousands and thousands of these cases where disambiguation can play a crucial role in the automated translation of text, a historical application of WSD indeed.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:3

WSD is typically conﬁgured as an intermediate task, either as a stand-alone module or properly integrated into an application (thus performing disambiguation implicitly). However, the success of WSD in real-world applications is still to be shown. Applicationoriented evaluation of WSD is an open research area, although different works and proposals have been published on the topic.
The results of recent comparative evaluations of WSD systems—mostly concerning a stand-alone assessment of WSD—show that most disambiguation methods have inherent limitations in terms, among others, of performance and generalization capability when ﬁne-grained sense distinctions are employed. On the other hand, the increasing availability of wide-coverage, rich lexical knowledge resources, as well as the construction of large-scale coarse-grained sense inventories, seems to open new opportunities for disambiguation approaches, especially when aiming at semantically enabling applications in the area of human-language technology.

1.2. History in Brief
The task of WSD is a historical one in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP). In fact, it was conceived as a fundamental task of Machine Translation (MT) already in the late 1940s [Weaver 1949]. At that time, researchers had already in mind essential ingredients of WSD, such as the context in which a target word occurs, statistical information about words and senses, knowledge resources, etc. Very soon it became clear that WSD was a very difﬁcult problem, also given the limited means available for computation. Indeed, its acknowledged hardness [Bar-Hillel 1960] was one of the main obstacles to the development of MT in the 1960s. During the 1970s the problem of WSD was attacked with AI approaches aiming at language understanding (e.g., Wilks [1975]). However, generalizing the results was difﬁcult, mainly because of the lack of large amounts of machine-readable knowledge. In this respect, work on WSD reached a turning point in the 1980s with the release of large-scale lexical resources, which enabled automatic methods for knowledge extraction [Wilks et al. 1990]. The 1990s led to the massive employment of statistical methods and the establishment of periodic evaluation campaigns of WSD systems, up to the present days. The interested reader can refer to Ide and Ve´ronis [1998] for an in-depth early history of WSD.

1.3. Outline
The article is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we formalize the WSD task (Section 2), and present the main approaches (Sections 3, 4, 5, and 6). Next, we turn to the evaluation of WSD (Sections 7 and 8), and discuss its potential in real-world applications (Section 9). We explore open problems and future directions in Section 10, and conclude in Section 11.

2. TASK DESCRIPTION
Word sense disambiguation is the ability to computationally determine which sense of a word is activated by its use in a particular context. WSD is usually performed on one or more texts (although in principle bags of words, i.e., collections of naturally occurring words, might be employed). If we disregard the punctuation, we can view a text T as a sequence of words (w1, w2, . . . , wn), and we can formally describe WSD as the task of assigning the appropriate sense(s) to all or some of the words in T , that is, to identify a mapping A from words to senses, such that A(i) ⊆ SensesD(wi), where SensesD(wi) is
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:4

R. Navigli

the set of senses encoded in a dictionary D for word wi,1 and A(i) is that subset of the senses of wi which are appropriate in the context T . The mapping A can assign more than one sense to each word wi ∈ T , although typically only the most appropriate sense is selected, that is, | A(i) |= 1.
WSD can be viewed as a classiﬁcation task: word senses are the classes, and an automatic classiﬁcation method is used to assign each occurrence of a word to one or more classes based on the evidence from the context and from external knowledge sources. Other classiﬁcation tasks are studied in the area of natural language processing (for an introduction see Manning and Schu¨ tze [1999] and Jurafsky and Martin [2000]), such as part-of-speech tagging (i.e., the assignment of parts of speech to target words in context), named entity resolution (the classiﬁcation of target textual items into predeﬁned categories), text categorization (i.e., the assignment of predeﬁned labels to target texts), etc. An important difference between these tasks and WSD is that the former use a single predeﬁned set of classes (parts of speech, categories, etc.), whereas in the latter the set of classes typically changes depending on the word to be classiﬁed. In this respect, WSD actually comprises n distinct classiﬁcation tasks, where n is the size of the lexicon.
We can distinguish two variants of the generic WSD task:
—Lexical sample (or targeted WSD), where a system is required to disambiguate a restricted set of target words usually occurring one per sentence. Supervised systems are typically employed in this setting, as they can be trained using a number of hand-labeled instances (training set) and then applied to classify a set of unlabeled examples (test set);
—All-words WSD, where systems are expected to disambiguate all open-class words in a text (i.e., nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs). This task requires wide-coverage systems. Consequently, purely supervised systems can potentially suffer from the problem of data sparseness, as it is unlikely that a training set of adequate size is available which covers the full lexicon of the language of interest. On the other hand, other approaches, such as knowledge-lean systems, rely on full-coverage knowledge resources, whose availability must be assured.
We now turn to the four main elements of WSD: the selection of word senses (i.e., classes), the use of external knowledge sources, the representation of context, and the selection of an automatic classiﬁcation method.
2.1. Selection of Word Senses
A word sense is a commonly accepted meaning of a word. For instance, consider the following two sentences:
(c) She chopped the vegetables with a chef ’s knife.
(d) A man was beaten and cut with a knife.
The word knife is used in the above sentences with two different senses: a tool (c) and a weapon (d). The two senses are clearly related, as they possibly refer to the same object; however the object’s intended uses are different. The examples make it clear that determining the sense inventory of a word is a key problem in word sense disambiguation: are we intended to assign different classes to the two occurrences of knife in sentences (c) and (d)?
A sense inventory partitions the range of meaning of a word into its senses. Word senses cannot be easily discretized, that is, reduced to a ﬁnite discrete set of entries,

1Here we are assuming that senses can be enumerated, as this is the most viable approach if we want to compare and assess word sense disambiguation systems. See Section 2.1 below.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:5

knife n. 1. a cutting tool composed of a blade with a sharp point and a handle. 2. an instrument with a handle and blade with a sharp point used as a weapon.
Fig. 1. An example of an enumerative entry for noun knife.

Fig. 2. An example of a generative entry for noun knife.
each encoding a distinct meaning. The main reason for this difﬁculty stems from the fact that the language is inherently subject to change and interpretation. Also, given a word, it is arguable where one sense ends and the next begins. For instance, consider the sense inventory for noun knife reported in Figure 1. Should we add a further sense to the inventory for “a cutting blade forming part of a machine” or does the ﬁrst sense comprise this sense? As a result of such uncertainties, different choices will be made in different dictionaries.
Moreover, the required granularity of sense distinctions might depend on the application. For example, there are cases in machine translation where word ambiguity is preserved across languages (e.g., the word interest in English, Italian, and French). As a result, it would be superﬂuous to enumerate those senses (e.g., the ﬁnancial vs. the pastime sense), whereas in other applications we might want to distinguish them (e.g., for retrieving documents concerning ﬁnancial matters rather than pastime activities).
While ambiguity does not usually affect the human understanding of language, WSD aims at making explicit the meaning underlying words in context in a computational manner. Therefore it is generally agreed that, in order to enable an objective evaluation and comparison of WSD systems, senses must be enumerated in a sense inventory (enumerative approach; see Figure 1). All traditional paper-based and machine-readable dictionaries adopt the enumerative approach.
Nonetheless, a number of questions arise when it comes to motivating sense distinctions (e.g., based on attestations in a collection of texts), deciding whether to provide ﬁne-grained or coarse-grained senses (splitting vs. lumping sense distinctions), organize senses in the dictionary, etc. As an answer to these issues, a different approach has been proposed, namely, the generative approach (see Figure 2) [Pustejovsky 1991, 1995], in which related senses are generated from rules which capture regularities in the creation of senses. A further justiﬁcation given for the latter approach is that it is not possible to constrain the ever-changing expressivity of a word within a predetermined set of senses [Kilgarriff 1997, 2006]. In the generative approach, senses are expressed in terms of qualia roles, that is, semantic features which structure the basic knowledge about an entity. The features stem from Aristotle’s basic elements for describing the meaning of lexical items. Figure 2 shows an example of generative
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:6

R. Navigli

entry for noun knife (the example is that of Johnston and Busa [1996]; see also Pustejovsky [1995]). Four qualia roles are provided, namely: formal (a superordinate of knife), constitutive (parts of a knife), telic (the purpose of a knife), and agentive (who uses a knife). The instantiation of a combination of roles allows for the creation of a sense. Following the generative approach, Buitelaar [1998] proposed the creation of a resource, namely, CoreLex, which identiﬁes all the systematically related senses and allows for underspeciﬁed semantic tagging. Other approaches which aim at fuzzier sense distinctions include methods for sense induction, which we discuss in Section 4, and, more on linguistic grounds, ambiguity tests based on linguistic criteria [Cruse 1986].
In the following, given its widespread adoption within the research community, we will adopt the enumerative approach. However, works based on a fuzzier notion of word sense will be mentioned throughout the survey. We formalize the association of discrete sense distinctions with words encoded in a dictionary D as a function:

SensesD : L × POS → 2C,

where L is the lexicon, that is, the set of words encoded in the dictionary, POS =

{n, a, v, r} is the set of open-class parts of speech (respectively nouns, adjectives, verbs, and adverbs), and C is the full set of concept labels in dictionary D (2C denotes the

power set of its concepts).

Throughout this survey, we denote a word w with wp where p is its part of speech ( p ∈ POS), that is, we have wp ∈ L × POS. Thus, given a part-of-speech tagged word

wp, we abbreviate SensesD(w, p) as SensesD(wp), which encodes the senses of wp as

a set of the distinct meanings that wp is assumed to denote depending on the context

in which it cooccurs. We note that the assumption that a word is part-of-speech (POS)

tagged is a reasonable one, as modern POS taggers resolve this type of ambiguity with

very high performance.

We say that a word wp is monosemous when it can convey only one meaning, that is, | SensesD(wp) |= 1. For instance, well-beingn is a monosemous word, as it denotes a

single sense, that of being comfortable, happy or healthy. Conversely, wp is polysemous

if it can convey more meanings (e.g., racen as a competition, as a contest of speed, as a

taxonomic group, etc.). Senses of a word wp which can convey (usually etimologically)

unrelated meanings are homonymous (e.g., racen as a contest vs. racen as a taxonomic

group).

Finally,

we

denote

the

ith

word

sense

of

a

word

w

with

part

of

speech

p

as

wi
p

(other notations are in use, such as, e.g., w# p#i).

For a good introduction to word senses, the interested reader is referred to Kilgarriff

[2006], and to Ide and Wilks [2006] for further discussion focused on WSD and appli-

cations.

2.2. External Knowledge Sources
Knowledge is a fundamental component of WSD. Knowledge sources provide data which are essential to associate senses with words. They can vary from corpora of texts, either unlabeled or annotated with word senses, to machine-readable dictionaries, thesauri, glossaries, ontologies, etc. A description of all the resources used in the ﬁeld of WSD is out of the scope of this survey. Here we will give a brief overview of these resources (for more details, cf. Ide and Ve´ronis [1998]; Litkowski [2005]; Agirre and Stevenson [2006]).
—Structured resources:
—Thesauri, which provide information about relationships between words, like synonymy (e.g., carn is a synonym of motorcarn), antonymy (representing opposite meanings, e.g., uglya is an antonym of beautifula) and, possibly, further relations

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:7

[Kilgarriff and Yallop 2000]. The most widely used thesaurus in the ﬁeld of WSD is Roget’s International Thesaurus [Roget 1911]. The latest edition of the thesaurus contains 250,000 word entries organized in six classes and about 1000 categories. Some researchers also use the Macquarie Thesaurus [Bernard 1986], which encodes more than 200,000 synonyms.
—Machine-readable dictionaries (MRDs), which have become a popular source of knowledge for natural language processing since the 1980s, when the ﬁrst dictionaries were made available in electronic format: among these, we cite the Collins English Dictionary, the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English, the Oxford Dictionary of English [Soanes and Stevenson 2003], and the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (LDOCE) [Proctor 1978]. The latter has been one of the most widely used machine-readable dictionaries within the NLP research community (see Wilks et al. [1996] for a thorough overview of research using LDOCE), before the diffusion of WordNet [Miller et al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998], presently the most utilized resource for word sense disambiguation in English. WordNet is often considered one step beyond common MRDs, as it encodes a rich semantic network of concepts. For this reason it is usually deﬁned as a computational lexicon;
—Ontologies, which are speciﬁcations of conceptualizations of speciﬁc domains of interest [Gruber 1993], usually including a taxonomy and a set of semantic relations. In this respect, WordNet and its extensions (cf. Section 2.2.1) can be considered as ontologies, as well as the Omega Ontology [Philpot et al. 2005], an effort to reorganize and conceptualize WordNet, the SUMO upper ontology [Pease et al. 2002], etc. An effort in a domain-oriented direction is the Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS) [McCray and Nelson 1995], which includes a semantic network providing a categorization of medical concepts.
—Unstructured resources:
—Corpora, that is, collections of texts used for learning language models. Corpora can be sense-annotated or raw (i.e., unlabeled). Both kinds of resources are used in WSD, and are most useful in supervised and unsupervised approaches, respectively (see Section 2.4):
—Raw corpora: the Brown Corpus [Kucera and Francis 1967], a million word balanced collection of texts published in the United States in 1961; the British National Corpus (BNC) [Clear 1993], a 100 million word collection of written and spoken samples of the English language (often used to collect word frequencies and identify grammatical relations between words); the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) corpus [Charniak et al. 2000], a collection of approximately 30 million words from WSJ; the American National Corpus [Ide and Suderman 2006], which includes 22 million words of written and spoken American English; the Gigaword Corpus, a collection of 2 billion words of newspaper text [Graff 2003], etc.
—Sense-Annotated Corpora: SemCor [Miller et al. 1993], the largest and most used sense-tagged corpus, which includes 352 texts tagged with around 234,000 sense annotations; MultiSemCor [Pianta et al. 2002], an English-Italian parallel corpus annotated with senses from the English and Italian versions of WordNet; the linehard-serve corpus [Leacock et al. 1993] containing 4000 sense-tagged examples of these three words (noun, adjective, and verb, respectively); the interest corpus [Bruce and Wiebe 1994] with 2369 sense-labeled examples of noun interest; the DSO corpus [Ng and Lee 1996], produced by the Defence Science Organisation (DSO) of Singapore, which includes 192,800 sense-tagged tokens of 191 words from the Brown and Wall Street Journal corpora; the Open Mind Word Expert

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:8

R. Navigli

data set [Chklovski and Mihalcea 2002], a corpus of sentences whose instances of 288 nouns were semantically annotated by Web users in a collaborative effort; the Senseval and Semeval data sets, semantically-annotated corpora from the four evaluation campaigns (presented in Section 8). All these corpora are annotated with different versions of the WordNet sense inventory, with the exception of the interest corpus (tagged with LDOCE senses), and the Senseval-1 corpus, which was sense-labeled with the HECTOR sense inventory, a lexicon and corpus from a joint Oxford University Press/Digital project [Atkins 1993].
—Collocation resources, which register the tendency for words to occur regularly with others: examples include the Word Sketch Engine,2 JustTheWord,3 The British National Corpus collocations,4 the Collins Cobuild Corpus Concordance,5 etc. Recently, a huge dataset of text cooccurrences has been released, which has rapidly gained a large popularity in the WSD community, namely, the Web1T corpus [Brants and Franz 2006]. The corpus contains frequencies for sequences of up to ﬁve words in a one trillion word corpus derived from the Web.
—Other resources, such as word frequency lists, stoplists (i.e., lists of undiscriminating noncontent words, like a, an, the, and so on), domain labels [Magnini and Cavaglia` 2000], etc.
In the following subsections, we provide details for two knowledge sources which have been widely used in the ﬁeld: WordNet and SemCor.

2.2.1. WordNet. WordNet [Miller et al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998] is a computational lexicon of English based on psycholinguistic principles, created and maintained at Princeton University.6 It encodes concepts in terms of sets of synonyms (called synsets). Its latest version, WordNet 3.0, contains about 155,000 words organized in over 117,000 synsets. For example, the concept of automobile is expressed with the following synset (recall superscript and subscript denote the word’s sense identiﬁer and part-of-speech tag, respectively):
car1n, auto1n, automobile1n, machine4n, motorcar1n .
We can view a synset as a set of word senses all expressing (approximately) the same meaning. According to the notation introduced in Section 2.1, the following function associates with each part-of-speech tagged word wp the set of its WordNet senses:
SensesW N : L × POS → 2 SYNSETS,
where SYNSETS is the entire set of synsets in WordNet. For example:
SensesW N (carn) = car1n, auto1n, automobile1n, machinen4, motorcar1n , car2n, rail carn1, rail way carn1, rail road carn1 , cable carn1, car3n , car4n, gondolan3 , car5n, elevator carn1 .

2http://www.sketchengine.co.uk. 3http://193.133.140.102/JustTheWord. 4Available through the SARA system from http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk. 5http://www.collins.co.uk/Corpus/CorpusSearch.aspx. 6http://wordnet.princeton.edu.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:9

Fig. 3. An excerpt of the WordNet semantic network.
We note that each word sense univocally identiﬁes a single synset. For instance, given car1n the corresponding synset {car1n, auto1n, automobile1n, machine4n, motorcar1n} is univocally determined. In Figure 3 we report an excerpt of the WordNet semantic network containing the car1n synset. For each synset, WordNet provides the following information:
—A gloss, that is, a textual deﬁnition of the synset possibly with a set of usage examples (e.g., the gloss of car1n is “a 4-wheeled motor vehicle; usually propelled by an internal combustion engine; ‘he needs a car to get to work’ ”).7
—Lexical and semantic relations, which connect pairs of word senses and synsets, respectively: while semantic relations apply to synsets in their entirety (i.e., to all members of a synset), lexical relations connect word senses included in the respective synsets. Among the latter we have the following: —Antonymy: X is an antonym of Y if it expresses the opposite concept (e.g., gooda1 is the antonym of bada1). Antonymy holds for all parts of speech. —Pertainymy: X is an adjective which can be deﬁned as “of or pertaining to” a noun (or, rarely, another adjective) Y (e.g., dentala1 pertains to tooth1n). —Nominalization: a noun X nominalizes a verb Y (e.g., service2n nominalizes the verb serve4v ). Among the semantic relations we have the following: —Hypernymy (also called kind-of or is-a): Y is a hypernym of X if every X is a (kind of) Y (motor vehicle1n is a hypernym of car1n). Hypernymy holds between pairs of nominal or verbal synsets.
7Recently, Princeton University released the Princeton WordNet Gloss Corpus, a corpus of manually and automatically sense-annotated glosses from WordNet 3.0, available from the WordNet Web site.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:10

R. Navigli

Fig. 4. An excerpt of the WordNet domain labels taxonomy.
—Hyponymy and troponymy: the inverse relations of hypernymy for nominal and verbal synsets, respectively.
—Meronymy (also called part-of ): Y is a meronym of X if Y is a part of X (e.g., ﬂesh3n is a meronym of fruit1n). Meronymy holds for nominal synsets only.
—Holonymy: Y is a holonym of X if X is a part of Y (the inverse of meronymy). —Entailment: a verb Y is entailed by a verb X if by doing X you must be doing Y (e.g.,
snore1v entails sleep1v). —Similarity: an adjective X is similar to an adjective Y (e.g., beautifula1 is similar to
prettya1 ). —Attribute: a noun X is an attribute for which an adjective Y expresses a value (e.g.,
hota1 is a value of temperature1n). —See also: this is a relation of relatedness between adjectives (e.g., beautifula1 is
related to attractivea1 through the see also relation).
Magnini and Cavaglia` [2000] developed a data set of domain labels for WordNet synsets.8 WordNet synsets have been semiautomatically annotated with one or more domain labels from a predeﬁned set of about 200 tags from the Dewey Decimal Classiﬁcation (e.g. FOOD, ARCHITECTURE, SPORT, etc.) plus a generic label (FACTOTUM) when no domain information is available. Labels are organized in a hierarchical structure (e.g., PSYCHOANALYSIS is a kind of PSYCHOLOGY domain). Figure 4 shows an excerpt of the domain taxonomy.
Given its widespread diffusion within the research community, WordNet can be considered a de facto standard for English WSD. Following its success, wordnets for several languages have been developed and linked to the original Princeton WordNet. The ﬁrst effort in this direction was made in the context of the EuroWordNet project [Vossen 1998], which provided an interlingual alignment between national wordnets. Nowadays there are several ongoing efforts to create, enrich, and maintain wordnets for different languages, such as MultiWordNet [Pianta et al. 2002] and BalkaNet [Tuﬁs et al. 2004]. An association, namely, the Global WordNet Association,9 has been founded to share and link wordnets for all languages in the world. These projects make not only WSD possible in other languages, but can potentially enable the application of WSD to machine translation.
8IRST domain labels are available at http://wndomains.itc.it. 9http://www.globalwordnet.org.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:11

As of Sunday1n night1n there was4v no word2n of a resolution1n being offered2v therer1 to rescind1v the action1n. Pelham pointed out1v that Georgia1n voters1n lastr1 November1n rejected2v a constitutionala1 amendment1n to allow2v legislators1n to vote1n on pay1n raises1n for futurea1 Legislature1n sessions2n.
Fig. 5. An excerpt of the SemCor semantically annotated corpus.
2.2.2. SemCor. SemCor [Miller et al. 1993] is a subset of the Brown Corpus [Kucera and Francis 1967] whose content words have been manually annotated with part-ofspeech tags, lemmas, and word senses from the WordNet inventory. SemCor is composed of 352 texts: in 186 texts all the open-class words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) are annotated with these information, while in the remaining 166 texts only verbs are semantically annotated with word senses.
Overall, SemCor comprises a sample of around 234,000 semantically annotated words, thus constituting the largest sense-tagged corpus for training sense classiﬁers in supervised disambiguation settings. An excerpt of a text in the corpus is reported in Figure 5. For instance, wordn is annotated in the ﬁrst sentence with sense #2, deﬁned in WordNet as “a brief statement” (compared, e.g., to sense #1 deﬁned as “a unit of language that native speakers can identify”). The original SemCor was annotated according to WordNet 1.5. However, mappings exist to more recent versions (e.g., 2.0, 2.1, etc.).
Based on SemCor, a bilingual corpus was created by Bentivogli and Pianta [2005]: MultiSemCor is an English/Italian parallel corpus aligned at the word level which provides for each word its part of speech, its lemma, and a sense from the English and Italian versions of WordNet (namely, MultiWordNet [Pianta et al. 2002]). The corpus was built by aligning the Italian translation of SemCor at the word level. The original word sense tags from SemCor were then transferred to the aligned Italian words.
2.3. Representation of Context
As text is an unstructured source of information, to make it a suitable input to an automatic method it is usually transformed into a structured format. To this end, a preprocessing of the input text is usually performed, which typically (but not necessarily) includes the following steps:
—tokenization, a normalization step, which splits up the text into a set of tokens (usually words);
—part-of-speech tagging, consisting in the assignment of a grammatical category to each word (e.g., “the/DT bar/NN was/VBD crowded/JJ,” where DT, NN, VBD and JJ are tags for determiners, nouns, verbs, and adjectives, respectively);
—lemmatization, that is, the reduction of morphological variants to their base form (e.g. was → be, bars → bar);
—chunking, which consists of dividing a text in syntactically correlated parts (e.g., [the bar]NP [was crowded]VP, respectively the noun phrase and the verb phrase of the example).
—parsing, whose aim is to identify the syntactic structure of a sentence (usually involving the generation of a parse tree of the sentence structure).
We report an example of the processing ﬂow in Figure 6. As a result of the preprocessing phase of a portion of text (e.g., a sentence, a paragraph, a full document, etc.), each word can be represented as a vector of features of different kinds or in more structured ways, for example, as a tree or a graph of the relations between words. The representation of a word in context is the main support, together with additional

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:12

R. Navigli

Fig. 6. An example of preprocessing steps of text.
knowledge resources, for allowing automatic methods to choose the appropriate sense from a reference inventory.
A set of features is chosen to represent the context. These include (but are not limited to) information resulting from the above-mentioned preprocessing steps, such as partof-speech tags, grammatical relations, lemmas, etc. We can group these features as follows:
—local features, which represent the local context of a word usage, that is, features of a small number of words surrounding the target word, including part-of-speech tags, word forms, positions with respect to the target word, etc.;
—topical features, which—in contrast to local features—deﬁne the general topic of a text or discourse, thus representing more general contexts (e.g., a window of words, a sentence, a phrase, a paragraph, etc.), usually as bags of words;
—syntactic features, representing syntactic cues and argument-head relations between the target word and other words within the same sentence (note that these words might be outside the local context);
—semantic features, representing semantic information, such as previously established senses of words in context, domain indicators, etc.
Based on this set of features, each word occurrence (usually within a sentence) can be converted to a feature vector. For instance, Table I illustrates a simple example of a possible feature vector for the following sentences:
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

Table I. Sentence
(e) (f)

Example of Feature Vectors for Two Sentences Targeted on Noun bank

w−2

w−1

w+1

w+2

Sense tag

-

Determiner

Verb

Adj

FINANCE

Preposition Determiner Preposition Determiner SHORE

10:13

Context Size Unigram Bigrams
Trigrams
Window (size ±n) (2n + 1)-grams Sentence
Paragraph

Table II. Different Sizes of Word Contexts Context Example
. . . bar . . . . . . friendly bar . . . . . . bar and . . . . . . friendly bar and . . . . . . bar and a . . . . . . and friendly bar . . . . . . warm and friendly bar and a cheerful . . . (n=3) . . . area, a warm and friendly bar and a cheerful dining room . . . (n=5) There is a lounge area, a warm and friendly bar and a cheerful dining room. This is a very nice hotel. There is a lounge area, a warm and friendly bar and a cheerful dining room. A buffet style breakfast is served in the dining room between 7 A.M. and 10 A.M.

(e) The bank cashed my check, and
(f) We sat along the bank of the Tevere river,
where bank is our target word, and our vectors include four local features for the part-of-speech tags of the two words on the left and on the right of bank and a sense classiﬁcation tag (either FINANCE or SHORE in our example).
We report in Table II examples of different context sizes, targeted on the word barn. Sizes range from n-grams (i.e., a sequence of n words including the target word), specifically unigrams (n = 1), bigrams (n = 2), and trigrams (n = 3), to a full sentence or paragraph containing the target word. Notice that for n-grams several choices can be made based on the position of the surrounding words (to the left or right of the target word), whereas a window of size ±n is a (2n+ 1)-gram centered around the target word.
More structured representations, such as trees or graphs, can be employed to represent word contexts, which can potentially span an entire text. For instance, Ve´ronis [2004] builds cooccurrence graphs (an example is shown in Figure 7), Mihalcea et al. [2004] and Navigli and Velardi [2005] construct semantic graphs for path and link analysis, etc.
Flat representations, such as context vectors, are more suitable for supervised disambiguation methods, as training instances are usually (though not always) in this form. In contrast, structured representations are more useful in unsupervised and knowledge-based methods, as they can fully exploit the lexical and semantic interrelationships between concepts encoded in semantic networks and computational lexicons. It must be noted that choosing the appropriate size of context (both in structured and unstructured representations) is an important factor in the development of a WSD algorithm, as it is known to affect the disambiguation performance (see, e.g., Yarowsky and Florian [2002]; Cuadros and Rigau [2006]).
In the following subsection, we present the different classiﬁcation methods that can be applied to representations of word contexts.
2.4. Choice of a Classiﬁcation Method
The ﬁnal step is the choice of a classiﬁcation method. Most of the approaches to the resolution of word ambiguity stem from the ﬁeld of machine learning, ranging from

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:14

R. Navigli

Fig. 7. A possible graph representation of barn.
methods with strong supervision, to syntactic and structural pattern recognition approaches (see Mitchell [1997] and Alpaydin [2004] for an in-depth treatment of the ﬁeld or Russell and Norvig [2002] and Luger [2004] for an introduction). We will not provide here a full survey of the area, but will focus in the next sections on several methods applied to the WSD problem. We can broadly distinguish two main approaches to WSD:
—supervised WSD: these approaches use machine-learning techniques to learn a classiﬁer from labeled training sets, that is, sets of examples encoded in terms of a number of features together with their appropriate sense label (or class);
—unsupervised WSD: these methods are based on unlabeled corpora, and do not exploit any manually sense-tagged corpus to provide a sense choice for a word in context.
We further distinguish between knowledge-based (or knowledge-rich, or dictionarybased) and corpus-based (or knowledge-poor) approaches. The former rely on the use of external lexical resources, such as machine-readable dictionaries, thesauri, ontologies, etc., whereas the latter do not make use of any of these resources for disambiguation.
In Figure 8 we exemplify WSD approaches on a bidimensional space. The ordinate is the degree of supervision, that is, the ratio of sense-annotated data to unlabeled data used by the system: a system is deﬁned as fully (or strongly) supervised if it exclusively employs sense-labeled training data, semisupervised and weakly (or minimally) supervised if both sense-labeled and unlabeled data are employed in different proportions to learn a classiﬁer, fully unsupervised if only unlabeled plain data is employed. The abscissa of the plane in the ﬁgure represents the amount of knowledge, which concerns all other data employed by the system, including dictionary deﬁnitions, lexicosemantic relations, domain labels, and so on.
Unfortunately, we cannot position on the plane speciﬁc methods discussed in the next sections, because of the difﬁculty in quantifying the amount of knowledge and supervision as a discrete number. Yet we tried to identify with letters from (a) to (i) the approximate position of general approaches on the space illustrated in Figure 8: (a) fully unsupervised methods, which do not use any amount of knowledge (not even sense inventories); (b) and (c) minimally supervised and semisupervised approaches, requiring a minimal or partial amount of supervision, respectively; (d) supervised approaches (machine-learning classiﬁers). Associating other points in space with speciﬁc
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:15

Fig. 8. A space of approaches to WSD according to the amount of supervision and knowledge used.
approaches is more difﬁcult and depends on the speciﬁc implementation of the single methods. However, we can say that most knowledge-based approaches relying on structural properties (g), such as the graph structure of semantic networks, usually use more supervision and knowledge than those based on gloss overlap (e) or methods for determining word sense dominance (f). Finally, domain-driven approaches, which often exploit hand-coded domain labels, can be placed around point (h) if they include supervised components for estimating sense probabilities, or around point (i) otherwise.
Finally, we can categorize WSD approaches as token-based and type-based. Tokenbased approaches associate a speciﬁc meaning with each occurrence of a word depending on the context in which it appears. In contrast, type-based disambiguation is based on the assumption that a word is consensually referred with the same sense within a single text. Consequently, these methods tend to infer a sense (called the predominant sense) for a word from the analysis of the entire text and possibly assign it to each occurrence within the text. Notice that token-based approaches can always be adapted to perform in a type-based fashion by assigning the majority sense throughout the text to each occurrence of a word.
First, we overview purely supervised and unsupervised approaches to WSD (Sections 3 and 4, respectively). Next, we discuss knowledge-based approaches to WSD (Section 5) and present hybrid approaches (Section 6). For several of these approaches the reported performance is often based on in-house or small scale experiments. We will concentrate on experimental evaluation in Sections 7 and 8, where we will see how most WSD systems nowadays use a mixture of techniques in order to maximize their performance.
3. SUPERVISED DISAMBIGUATION
In the last 15 years, the NLP community has witnessed a signiﬁcant shift from the use of manually crafted systems to the employment of automated classiﬁcation methods [Cardie and Mooney 1999]. Such a dramatic increase of interest toward machinelearning techniques is reﬂected by the number of supervised approaches applied to the problem of WSD. Supervised WSD uses machine-learning techniques for inducing a
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:16

Table III. An Example of Decision List

Feature

Prediction

Score

account with bank stand/V on/P . . . bank
bank of blood work/V . . . bank the left/J bank
of the bank

Bank/FINANCE Bank/FINANCE Bank/SUPPLY Bank/FINANCE Bank/RIVER
-

4.83 3.35 2.48 2.33 1.12 0.01

R. Navigli

classiﬁer from manually sense-annotated data sets. Usually, the classiﬁer (often called word expert) is concerned with a single word and performs a classiﬁcation task in order to assign the appropriate sense to each instance of that word. The training set used to learn the classiﬁer typically contains a set of examples in which a given target word is manually tagged with a sense from the sense inventory of a reference dictionary.
Generally, supervised approaches to WSD have obtained better results than unsupervised methods (cf. Section 8). In the next subsections, we brieﬂy review the most popular machine learning methods and contextualize them in the ﬁeld of WSD. Additional information on the topic can be found in Manning and Schu¨ tze [1999], Jurafsky and Martin [2000], and Ma` rquez et al. [2006].

3.1. Decision Lists

A decision list [Rivest 1987] is an ordered set of rules for categorizing test instances (in the case of WSD, for assigning the appropriate sense to a target word). It can be seen as a list of weighted “if-then-else” rules. A training set is used for inducing a set of features. As a result, rules of the kind (feature-value, sense, score) are created. The ordering of these rules, based on their decreasing score, constitutes the decision list.
Given a word occurrence w and its representation as a feature vector, the decision list is checked, and the feature with highest score that matches the input vector selects the word sense to be assigned:
Sˆ = argmaxSi∈SensesD(w) score(Si).
According to Yarowsky [1994], the score of sense Si is calculated as the maximum among the feature scores, where the score of a feature f is computed as the logarithm of the probability of sense Si given feature f divided by the sum of the probabilities of the other senses given feature f :

score(Si) = max log
f

P (Si | f ) . j =i P (S j | f )

The above formula is an adaptation to an arbitrary number of senses due to Agirre and Martinez [2000] of Yarowsky’s [1994] formula, originally based on two senses. The probabilities P (S j | f ) can be estimated using the maximum-likelihood estimate. Smoothing can be applied to avoid the problem of zero counts. Pruning can also be employed to eliminate unreliable rules with very low weight.
A simpliﬁed example of a decision list is reported in Table III. The ﬁrst rule in the example applies to the ﬁnancial sense of bank and expects account with as a left context, the third applies to bank as a supply (e.g., a bank of blood, a bank of food), and so on (notice that more rules can predict a given sense of a word).
It must be noted that, while in the original formulation [Rivest 1987] each rule in the decision list is unweighted and may contain a conjunction of features, in Yarowsky’s approach each rule is weighted and can only have a single feature. Decision lists have been the most successful technique in the ﬁrst Senseval evaluation competitions (e.g.,

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:17

Fig. 9. An example of a decision tree.
Yarowsky [2000], cf. Section 8). Agirre and Martinez [2000] applied them in an attempt to relieve the knowledge acquisition bottleneck caused by the lack of manually tagged corpora.

3.2. Decision Trees
A decision tree is a predictive model used to represent classiﬁcation rules with a tree structure that recursively partitions the training data set. Each internal node of a decision tree represents a test on a feature value, and each branch represents an outcome of the test. A prediction is made when a terminal node (i.e., a leaf) is reached.
In the last decades, decision trees have been rarely applied to WSD (in spite of some relatively old studies by, e.g., Kelly and Stone [1975] and Black [1988]). A popular algorithm for learning decision trees is the C4.5 algorithm [Quinlan 1993], an extension of the ID3 algorithm [Quinlan 1986]. In a comparative experiment with several machine learning algorithms for WSD, Mooney [1996] concluded that decision trees obtained with the C4.5 algorithm are outperformed by other supervised approaches. In fact, even though they represent the predictive model in a compact and human-readable way, they suffer from several issues, such as data sparseness due to features with a large number of values, unreliability of the predictions due to small training sets, etc.
An example of a decision tree for WSD is reported in Figure 9. For instance, if the noun bank must be classiﬁed in the sentence “we sat on a bank of sand,” the tree is traversed and, after following the no-yes-no path, the choice of sense bank/RIVER is made. The leaf with empty value (-) indicates that no choice can be made based on speciﬁc feature values.

3.3. Naive Bayes

A Naive Bayes classiﬁer is a simple probabilistic classiﬁer based on the application of
Bayes’ theorem. It relies on the calculation of the conditional probability of each sense Si of a word w given the features f j in the context. The sense Sˆ which maximizes the following formula is chosen as the most appropriate sense in context:

ˆ

P ( f1, . . . , fm | Si)P (Si)

S = argmax P (Si | f1, . . . , fm) = argmax

Si ∈SensesD (w)

Si ∈SensesD (w)

P( f1, . . . , fm)

m

= argmax P (Si) P ( f j | Si),

Si ∈SensesD (w)

j =1

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:18

R. Navigli

Fig. 10. An example of a Bayesian network.
where m is the number of features, and the last formula is obtained based on the naive assumption that the features are conditionally independent given the sense (the denominator is also discarded as it does not inﬂuence the calculations). The probabilities P (Si) and P ( f j | Si) are estimated, respectively, as the relative occurrence frequencies in the training set of sense Si and feature f j in the presence of sense Si. Zero counts need to be smoothed: for instance, they can be replaced with P (Si)/N where N is the size of the training set [Ng 1997; Escudero et al. 2000c]. However, this solution leads probabilities to sum to more than 1. Backoff or interpolation strategies can be used instead to avoid this problem.
In Figure 10 we report a simple example of a naive bayesian network. For instance, suppose that we want to classify the occurrence of noun bank in the sentence The bank cashed my check given the features: {w−1 = the, w+1 = cashed, head = bank, subj-verb = cash, verb-obj = −}, where the latter two features encode the grammatical role of noun bank as a subject and direct object in the target sentence. Suppose we estimated from the training set that the probability of these ﬁve features given the ﬁnancial sense of bank are P (w−1 = the | bank/FINANCE) = 0.66, P (w+1 = cashed | bank/FINANCE) = 0.35, P (head = bank | bank/FINANCE) = 0.76, P (subj-verb = cash | bank/FINANCE) = 0.44, P (verb-obj = − | bank/FINANCE) = 0.6. Also, we estimated the probability of occurrence of P (bank/FINANCE) = 0.36. The ﬁnal score is
score(bank /FINANCE) = 0.36 · 0.66 · 0.35 · 0.76 · 0.44 · 0.6 = 0.016.
In spite of the independence assumption, the method compares well with other supervised methods [Mooney 1996; Ng 1997; Leacock et al. 1998; Pedersen 1998; Bruce and Wiebe 1999].
3.4. Neural Networks
A neural network [McCulloch and Pitts 1943] is an interconnected group of artiﬁcial neurons that uses a computational model for processing data based on a connectionist approach. Pairs of (input feature, desired response) are input to the learning program. The aim is to use the input features to partition the training contexts into nonoverlapping sets corresponding to the desired responses. As new pairs are provided, link weights are progressively adjusted so that the output unit representing the desired response has a larger activation than any other output unit. In Figure 11 we report an illustration of a multilayer perceptron neural network (a perceptron is the simplest kind of feedforward neural network), fed with the values of four features and which outputs the corresponding value (i.e., score) of three senses of a target word in context.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:19

Fig. 11. An illustration of a feedforward neural network for WSD with four features and three responses, each associated to a word sense.
Neural networks are trained until the output of the unit corresponding to the desired response is greater than the output of any other unit for every training example. For testing, the classiﬁcation determined by the network is given by the unit with the largest output. Weights in the network can be either positive or negative, thus enabling the accumulation of evidence in favour or against a sense choice.
Cottrell [1989] employed neural networks to represent words as nodes: the words activate the concepts to which they are semantically related and vice versa. The activation of a node causes the activation of nodes to which it is connected by excitory links and the deactivation of those to which it is connected by inhibitory links (i.e., competing senses of the same word). Ve´ronis and Ide [1990] built a neural network from the dictionary deﬁnitions of the Collins English Dictionary. They connect words to their senses and each sense to words occurring in their textual deﬁnition. Recently, Tsatsaronis et al. [2007] successfully extended this approach to include all related senses linked by semantic relations in the reference resource, that is WordNet. Finally, Towell and Voorhees [1998] found that neural networks perform better without the use of hidden layers of nodes and used perceptrons for linking local and topical input features directly to output units (which represent senses).
In several studies, neural networks have been shown to perform well compared to other supervised methods [Leacock et al. 1993; Towell and Voorhees 1998; Mooney 1996]. However, these experiments are often performed on a small number of words. As major drawbacks of neural networks we cite the difﬁculty in interpreting the results, the need for a large quantity of training data, and the tuning of parameters such as thresholds, decay, etc.
3.5. Exemplar-Based or Instance-Based Learning
Exemplar-based (or instance-based, or memory-based) learning is a supervised algorithm in which the classiﬁcation model is built from examples. The model retains examples in memory as points in the feature space and, as new examples are subjected to classiﬁcation, they are progressively added to the model.
In this section we will see a speciﬁc approach of this kind, the k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) algorithm, which is one of the highest-performing methods in WSD [Ng 1997; Daelemans et al. 1999].
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:20

R. Navigli

Fig. 12. An example of kNN classiﬁcation on a bidimensional plane.
In kNN the classiﬁcation of a new example x = (x1, . . . , xm), represented in terms of its m feature values, is based on the senses of the k most similar previously stored examples. The distance between x and every stored example xi = (xi1 , . . . , xim) is calculated, for example, with the Hamming distance:
m
(x, xi) = w j δ x j , xij ,
j =1
where w j is the weight of the j th feature and δ(x j , xij ) is 0 if x j = xij and 1 otherwise. The set of the k closest instances is selected and the new instance is predicted to belong to the class (i.e., the sense) assigned to the most numerous instances within the set.
Feature weights w j can be estimated, for example, with the gain ratio measure [Quinlan 1993]. More complex metrics, like the modiﬁed value difference metric (MVDM) [Cost and Salzberg 1993], can be used to calculate graded distances between feature values, but usually they are computationally more expensive.
The number k of nearest neighbors can be established experimentally. Figure 12 visually illustrates an example of how a new instance relates to its kth nearest neighbors: instances assigned to the same sense are enclosed in polygons, black dots are the kth nearest neighbors of the new instance, and all other instances are drawn in gray. The new instance is assigned to the bottom class with ﬁve black dots.
Daelemans et al. [1999] argued that exemplar-based methods tend to be superior because they do not neglect exceptions and accumulate further aid for disambiguation as new examples are available. At present, exemplar-based learning achieves state-ofthe-art performance in WSD [Escudero et al. 2000b; Fujii et al. 1998; Ng and Lee 1996; Hoste et al. 2002; Decadt et al. 2004] (cf. Section 8).
3.6. Support Vector Machines (SVM)
This method (introduced by Boser et al. [1992]) is based on the idea of learning a linear hyperplane from the training set that separates positive examples from negative examples. The hyperplane is located in that point of the hyperspace which maximizes the distance to the closest positive and negative examples (called support vectors). In other words, support vector machines (SVMs) tend at the same time to minimize the empirical classiﬁcation error and maximize the geometric margin between positive and negative examples. Figure 13 illustrates the geometric intuition: the line in bold
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:21

Fig. 13. The geometric intuition of SVM.
represents the plane which separates the two classes of examples, whereas the two dotted lines denote the plane tangential to the closest positive and negative examples. The linear classiﬁer is based on two elements: a weight vector w perpendicular to the hyperplane (which accounts for the training set and whose components represent features) and a bias b which determines the offset of the hyperplane from the origin. An unlabeled example x is classiﬁed as positive if f (x) = w·x+b ≥ 0 (negative otherwise).
It can happen that the hyperplane cannot divide the space linearly. In these cases it is possible to use slack variables to “adjust” the training set, and allow for a linear separation of the space.
As SVM is a binary classiﬁer, in order to be usable for WSD it must be adapted to multiclass classiﬁcation (i.e., the senses of a target word). A simple possibility, for instance, is to reduce the multiclass classiﬁcation problem to a number of binary classiﬁcations of the kind sense Si versus all other senses. As a result, the sense with the highest conﬁdence is selected.
It can be shown that the classiﬁcation formula of SVM can be reduced to a function of the support vectors, which—in its linear form—determines the dot product of pairs of vectors. More in general, the similarity between two vectors x and y is calculated with a function called kernel which maps the original space (e.g., of the training and test instances) into a feature space such that k(x, y) = (x) · (y), where is a transformation (the simplest kernel is the dot product k(x, y) = x · y). A nonlinear transformation might be chosen to change the original representation into one that is more suitable for the problem (the so-called kernel trick). The capability to map vector spaces to higher dimensions with kernel methods, together with its high degree of adaptability based on parameter tuning, are among the key success factors of SVM.
SVM has been applied to a number of problems in NLP, including text categorization [Joachims 1998], chunking [Kudo and Matsumoto 2001], parsing [Collins 2004], and WSD [Escudero et al. 2000c; Murata et al. 2001; Keok and Ng 2002]. SVM has been shown to achieve the best results in WSD compared to several supervised approaches [Keok and Ng 2002].
3.7. Ensemble Methods
Sometimes different classiﬁers are available which we want to combine to improve the overall disambiguation accuracy. Combination strategies—called ensemble methods— typically put together learning algorithms of different nature, that is, with signiﬁcantly different characteristics. In other words, features should be chosen so as to yield significantly different, possibly independent, views of the training data (e.g., lexical, grammatical, semantic features, etc.).
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:22

R. Navigli

Ensemble methods are becoming more and more popular as they allow one to overcome the weaknesses of single supervised approaches. Several systems participating in recent evaluation campaigns employed these methods (see Section 8). Klein et al. [2002] and Florian et al. [2002] studied the combination of supervised WSD methods, achieving state-of-the-art results on the Senseval-2 lexical sample task (cf. Section 8.2). Brody et al. [2006] reported a study on ensembles of unsupervised WSD methods. When employed on a standard test set, such as that of the Senseval-3 all-words WSD task (cf. Section 8.3), ensemble methods overcome state-of-the-art performance among unsupervised systems (up to +4% accuracy).
Single classiﬁers can be combined with different strategies: here we introduce majority voting, probability mixture, rank-based combination, and AdaBoost. Other ensemble methods have been explored in the literature, such as weighted voting, maximum entropy combination, etc. (see, e.g., Klein et al. [2002]). In the following, we denote the ﬁrst-order classiﬁers (i.e., the systems to be combined, or ensemble components) as C1, C2, . . . , Cm.

3.7.1. Majority Voting. Given a target word w, each ensemble component can give one vote for a sense of w. The sense Sˆ which has the majority of votes is selected:
Sˆ = argmaxSi∈SensesD(w) | { j : vote(C j ) = Si} |,
where vote is a function that, given a classiﬁer, outputs the sense chosen by that classiﬁer. In case of tie, a random choice can be made among the senses with a majority vote. Alternatively, the ensemble does not output any sense.

3.7.2. Probability Mixture. Supposing the ﬁrst-order classiﬁers provide a conﬁdence
score for each sense of a target word w, we can normalize and convert these scores to a probability distribution over the senses of w. More formally, given a method C j and its scores {score(C j , Si)}i=1 |SensesD(w)|, we can obtain a probability PCj (Si) = maxk score(Cj ,Sk) score(Cj ,Si) for the ith sense of w. These probabilities (i.e., normalized scores) are summed, and the sense with the highest overall score is chosen:

Sˆ = argmaxSi∈SensesD(w)

m
PCj (Si).
j =1

3.7.3. Rank-Based Combination. Supposing that each ﬁrst-order classiﬁer provides a
ranking of the senses for a given target word w, the rank-based combination consists in choosing that sense Sˆ of w which maximizes the sum of its ranks output by the systems C1, . . . , Cm (we negate ranks so that the best ranking sense provides the highest contribution):

Sˆ = argmaxSi∈SensesD(w)

m
−RankCj (Si),
j =1

where RankCj (Si) is the rank of Si as output by classiﬁer C j (1 for the best sense, 2 for the second best sense, and so on).

3.7.4. AdaBoost. AdaBoost or adaptive boosting [Freund and Schapire 1999] is a general method for constructing a “strong” classiﬁer as a linear combination of several

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:23

“weak” classiﬁers. The method is adaptive in the sense that it tunes subsequent clas-
siﬁers in favor of those instances misclassiﬁed by previous classiﬁers. AdaBoost learns
the classiﬁers from a weighted training set (initially, all the instances in the data set
are equally weighted). The algorithm performs m iterations, one for each classiﬁer. At each iteration, the weights of incorrectly classiﬁed examples are increased, so as
to cause subsequent classiﬁers to focus on those examples (thus reducing the overall classiﬁcation error). As a result of each iteration j ∈ {1, . . . , m}, a weight α j is acquired for classiﬁer C j which is typically a function of the classiﬁcation error of C j over the training set. The classiﬁers are combined as follows:

m

H(x) = sign

α j C j (x) ,

j =1

where x is an example from the training set, C1, . . . , Cm are the ﬁrst-order classiﬁers that we want to improve, α j determines the importance of classiﬁer C j , and H is the resulting “strong” classiﬁer. H is the sign function of the linear combination of the “weak” classiﬁers, which is interpreted as the predicted class (the basic AdaBoost works only with binary outputs, −1 or +1). The conﬁdence of this choice is given by the magnitude of its argument. An extension of AdaBoost which deals with multiclass multilabel classiﬁcation is AdaBoost.MH [Schapire and Singer 1999].
AdaBoost has its roots in a theoretical framework for studying machine learning called the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning model. It is sensitive to noisy data and outliers, although it is less susceptible to the overﬁtting problem than most learning algorithms. An application of AdaBoost to WSD was illustrated by Escudero et al. [2000a].

3.8. Minimally and Semisupervised Disambiguation
The boundary between supervised and unsupervised disambiguation is not always clearcut. In fact, we can deﬁne minimally or semisupervised methods which learn sense classiﬁers from annotated data with minimal or partial human supervision, respectively. In this section we describe two WSD approaches of this kind, based on the automatic bootstrapping of a corpus from a small number of manually tagged examples and on the use of monosemous relatives.

3.8.1. Bootstrapping. The aim of bootstrapping is to build a sense classiﬁer with little training data, and thus overcome the main problems of supervision: the lack of annotated data and the data sparsity problem. Bootstrapping usually starts from few annotated data A, a large corpus of unannotated data U , and a set of one or more basic classiﬁers. As a result of iterative applications of a bootstrapping algorithm, the annotated corpus A grows increasingly and the untagged data set U shrinks until some threshold is reached for the remaining examples in U . The small set of initial examples in A can be generated from hand-labeling [Hearst 1991] or from the automatic selection with the aid of accurate heuristics [Yarowsky 1995].
There are two main approaches to bootstrapping in WSD: cotraining and selftraining. Both approaches create a subset U ⊂ U of p unlabeled examples chosen at random. Each classiﬁer is trained on the annotated data set A and applied to label the set of examples in U . As a result of labeling, the most reliable examples are selected according to some criterion, and added to A. The procedure is repeated several times (at each iteration U includes a new subset of p random examples from U ). Within this setting, the main difference between cotraining and self-training is that the former alternates two classiﬁers, whereas the latter uses only one classiﬁer, and at each

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:24

R. Navigli

Fig. 14. An example of Yarowsky’s algorithm. At each iteration, new examples are labeled with class a or b and added to the set A of sense tagged examples.
iteration retrains on its own output. An example of use of these methods in WSD was presented by Mihalcea [2004], where the two classiﬁers for cotraining use local and topical information, respectively, and a self-training single classiﬁer combines the two kinds of information.
Yarowsky’s [1995] boostrapping method is also a self-training approach. It relies on two heuristics:
—one sense per collocation [Yarowsky 1993]: nearby words strongly and consistently contribute to determine the sense of a word, based on their relative distance, order, and syntactic relationship;
—one sense per discourse [Gale et al. 1992c]: a word is consistently referred with the same sense within any given discourse or document.
The approach exploits decision lists to classify instances of the target word. A decision list is iteratively trained on a seed set of manually tagged examples A. To comply with the ﬁrst heuristic, the selection of the initial seed set relies on the manual choice of a single seed collocation for each possible sense of a word of interest. For instance, given that our target word is plantn, we may want to select {life, manufacturing} as a seed set, as this pair allows it to bootstrap the ﬂora and the industry senses of the word.
The examples in U , that is, our set of unlabeled examples, are classiﬁed according to the rules in the decision list. Then, we add to A those instances in U that are tagged with a probability above a certain threshold and we proceed to next iteration by retraining the classiﬁer on the growing seed set A. To comply with the second heuristic, the labels of newly added instances are adjusted according to those possibly occurring in the same texts which were already present in A during previous iterations. We report in Figure 14 an example of three iterations with Yarowsky’s algorithm: initially we select a small set A of seed examples for a word w with two senses a and b. During subsequent iterations, new examples sense-labeled with the decision list trained on A are added to the set A. We stop when no new example can be added to A.
An evaluation of Yarowsky’s bootstrapping algorithm leads to very high performance over 90% accuracy on a small-scale data set, where decisions are made on a binary basis (i.e., words are assumed to have two meanings). Given the small size of the experiment, this ﬁgure is not comparable to those obtained in the recent evaluation campaigns (cf. Section 8). A number of variations of the original Yarowsky’s algorithm were presented by Abney [2004].
As a major drawback of co- and self-training, we cite the lack of a method for selecting optimal values for parameters like the pool size p, the number of iterations and the number of most conﬁdent examples [Ng and Cardie 2003].
One of the main points of boostrapping is the selection of unlabeled data to be added to the labeled data set. A similar issue is addressed in active learning [Cohn et al. 1994],
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:25

Sense waiter1n waiter2n

Table IV. Topic Signatures for the Two Senses of waitern Topic Signature
restaurant, waitress, dinner, bartender, dessert, dishwasher, aperitif, brasserie, . . . hospital, station, airport, boyfriend, girlfriend, sentimentalist, adjudicator, . . .

where techniques for selective sampling are used to identify the most informative unlabeled examples for the learner of interest at each stage of training [Dagan and Engelson 1995]. Both bootstrapping and active learning address the same problem, that is, labeling data which is costly or hard to obtain. However, the two approaches differ in the requirement of human effort during the training phase. In fact, while the objective of bootstrapping is to induce knowledge with no human intervention (with the exclusion of the initial selection of manually annotated examples), active learning aims at identifying informative examples to be manually annotated at subsequent steps.
3.8.2. Monosemous Relatives. The Web is an immense ever-growing repository of multimedia content, which includes an enormous collection of texts. Viewing the Web as corpus [Kilgarriff and Grefenstette 2003] is an interesting idea which has been and is currently exploited to build annotated data sets, with the aim to relieve the problem of data sparseness in training sets. We can annotate such a large corpus with the aid of monosemous relatives (i.e., possibly synonymous words with a unique meaning) by way of a bootstrapping algorithm similar to Yarowsky’s [1995], starting from a few number of seeds. As a result, we can use the automatically annotated data to train WSD classiﬁers.
First, unique expressions U (S) for sense S of word w are identiﬁed. This can be done using different heuristics [Mihalcea and Moldovan 1999; Agirre and Martinez 2000] that look for monosemous synonyms of w, and unique expressions within the deﬁnition of S in the reference dictionary (mostly based on Leacock et al.’s [1998] pioneering technique for the acquisition of training examples from general corpora, in turn inspired by Yarowsky’s [1992] work). Then, for each expression e ∈ U (S), a search on the Web is performed and text snippets are retrieved. Finally, a sense annotated corpus is created by tagging each text snippet with sense S.
A similar procedure was proposed by Agirre et al. [2001] for the construction of topic signatures, that is, lists of closely related words associated with each word sense. A special signature function, χ 2, is used to determine which words appear distinctively in the documents retrieved for a speciﬁc word sense in contrast with the collections associated with the other senses of the same word. Filtering techniques are then used to clean signatures. An excerpt of the topic signatures extracted for the two senses of noun waiter (“a person who serves at table” and “a person who waits”) is reported in Table IV.
The outcome of these methods can be assessed either by manual inspection or in the construction of better classiﬁers for WSD (which is also one of the main objectives for building such resources). Mihalcea [2002a] compared the performance of the same WSD system trained with hand-labeled data (WordNet and SemCor) and with a bootstrapped corpus of labeled examples from the Web. As a result, a +4.2% improvement in accuracy is observed. Agirre et al. [2001] studied the performance of topic signatures in disambiguating a small number of words and found out that they do not seem to provide a relevant contribution to disambiguation. In contrast, in a recent study on large-scale knowledge resources, Cuadros and Rigau [2006] showed that automatically acquired knowledge resources (such as topic signatures) perform better than handlabeled resources when adopted for disambiguation in the Senseval-3 lexical sample task (see Section 8.3).

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:26

R. Navigli

4. UNSUPERVISED DISAMBIGUATION
Unsupervised methods have the potential to overcome the knowledge acquisition bottleneck [Gale et al. 1992b], that is, the lack of large-scale resources manually annotated with word senses. These approaches to WSD are based on the idea that the same sense of a word will have similar neighboring words. They are able to induce word senses from input text by clustering word occurrences, and then classifying new occurrences into the induced clusters. They do not rely on labeled training text and, in their purest version, do not make use of any machine–readable resources like dictionaries, thesauri, ontologies, etc. However, the main disadvantage of fully unsupervised systems is that, as they do not exploit any dictionary, they cannot rely on a shared reference inventory of senses.
While WSD is typically identiﬁed as a sense labeling task, that is, the explicit assignment of a sense label to a target word, unsupervised WSD performs word sense discrimination, that is, it aims to divide “the occurrences of a word into a number of classes by determining for any two occurrences whether they belong to the same sense or not” [Schu¨ tze 1998, page 97]. Consequently, these methods may not discover clusters equivalent to the traditional senses in a dictionary sense inventory. For this reason, their evaluation is usually more difﬁcult: in order to assess the quality of a sense cluster we should ask humans to look at the members of each cluster and determine the nature of the relationship that they all share (e.g., via questionnaires), or employ the clusters in end-to-end applications, thus measuring the quality of the former based on the performance of the latter.
Admittedly, unsupervised WSD approaches have a different aim than supervised and knowledge-based methods, that is, that of identifying sense clusters compared to that of assigning sense labels. However, sense discrimination and sense labeling are both subproblems of the word sense disambiguation task [Schu¨ tze 1998] and are strictly related, to the point that the clusters produced can be used at a later stage to sense tag word occurrences.
Hereafter, we present the main approaches to unsupervised WSD, namely: methods based on context clustering (Section 4.1), word clustering (Section 4.2), and cooccurrence graphs (Section 4.3). For further discussion on the topic the reader can refer to Manning and Schu¨ tze [1999] and Pedersen [2006].

4.1. Context Clustering
A ﬁrst set of unsupervised approaches is based on the notion of context clustering. Each occurrence of a target word in a corpus is represented as a context vector. The vectors are then clustered into groups, each identifying a sense of the target word.
A historical approach of this kind is based on the idea of word space [Schu¨ tze 1992]. that is, a vector space whose dimensions are words. A word w in a corpus can be represented as a vector whose j th component counts the number of times that word w j cooccurs with w within a ﬁxed context (a sentence or a larger context). The underlying hypothesis of this model is that the distributional proﬁle of words implicitly expresses their semantics.
Figure 15(a) shows two examples of word vectors, restaurant = (210, 80) and money = (100, 250), where the ﬁrst dimension represents the count of cooccurrences with word food and the second counts the cooccurrences with bank.
The similarity between two words v and w can then be measured geometrically, for example, by the cosine between the corresponding vectors v and w:

sim(v, w) = v · w = | v || w |

i=1 m viwi ,
m2m 2
i=1 vi i=1 wi

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:27

Fig. 15. (a) An example of two word vectors restaurant = (210, 80) and money = (100, 250). (b) A context vector for stock, calculated as the centroid (or the sum) of the vectors of words occurring in the same context.
where m is the number of features in each vector. A vector is computed for each word in a corpus. This kind of representation conﬂates senses: a vector includes all the senses of the word it represents (e.g., the senses stock as a supply and as capital are all summed in its word vector).
If we put together the set of vectors for each word in the corpus, we obtain a cooccurrence matrix. As we might deal with a large number of dimensions, latent semantic analysis (LSA) can be applied to reduce the dimensionality of the resulting multidimensional space via singular value decomposition (SVD) [Golub and van Loan 1989]. SVD ﬁnds the major axes of variation in the word space. The dimensionality reduction has the effect of taking the set of word vectors in the high-dimensional space and represent them in a lower-dimensional space: as a result, the dimensions associated with terms that have similar meanings are expected to be merged. After the reduction, contextual similarity between two words can be measured again in terms of the cosine between the corresponding vectors.
Now, our aim is to cluster context vectors, that is, vectors which represent the context of speciﬁc occurrences of a target word. A context vector is built as the centroid (i.e., the normalized average) of the vectors of the words occurring in the target context, which can be seen as an approximation of its semantic context [Schu¨ tze 1992, 1998]. An example of context vector is shown in Figure 15(b), where the word stock cooccurs with deposit, money, and account. These context vectors are second-order vectors, in that they do not directly represent the context at hand. In contrast to this representation, Pedersen and Bruce [1997] model the target context directly as a ﬁrst-order vector of several features (similar to those presented in Section 2.3).
Finally, sense discrimination can be performed by grouping the context vectors of a target word using a clustering algorithm. Schu¨ tze [1998] proposed an algorithm, called context-group discrimination, which groups the occurrences of an ambiguous word into clusters of senses, based on the contextual similarity between occurrences. Contextual similarity is calculated as described above, whereas clustering is performed with the Expectation Maximization algorithm, an iterative maximum likelihood estimation procedure of a probabilistic model [Dempster et al. 1977]. A different clustering approach consists of agglomerative clustering [Pedersen and Bruce 1997]. Initially, each instance constitutes a singleton cluster. Next, agglomerative clustering merges the most similar pair of clusters, and continues with successively less similar pairs until a stopping threshold is reached. The performance of the agglomerative clustering of context vectors was assessed in an unconstrained setting [Pedersen and Bruce 1997] and in the biomedical domain [Savova et al. 2005].
A problem in the construction of context vectors is that a large amount of (unlabeled) training data is required to determine a signiﬁcant distribution of word cooccurrences.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:28

R. Navigli

This issue can be addressed by augmenting the feature vector of each word with the content words occurring in the glosses of its senses [Purandare and Pedersen 2004] (note the circularity of this approach, which makes it semisupervised: we use an existing sense inventory to discriminate word senses). A further issue that can be addressed is the fact that different context clusters might not correspond to distinct word senses. A supervised classiﬁer can be trained and subsequently applied to tackle this issue [Niu et al. 2005].
Multilingual context vectors are also used to determine word senses [Ide et al. 2001]. In this setting, a word occurrence in a multilingual corpus is represented as a context vector which includes all the possible lexical translations of the target word w, whose value is 1 if the speciﬁc occurrence of w can be translated accordingly, and zero otherwise.

4.2. Word Clustering
In the previous section we represented word senses as ﬁrst- or second-order context vectors. A different approach to the induction of word senses consists of word clustering techniques, that is, methods which aim at clustering words which are semantically similar and can thus convey a speciﬁc meaning.
A well-known approach to word clustering [Lin 1998a] consists of the identiﬁcation of words W = (w1, . . . , wk) similar (possibly synonymous) to a target word w0. The similarity between w0 and wi is determined based on the information content of their single features, given by the syntactic dependencies which occur in a corpus (such as, e.g., subject-verb, verb-object, adjective-noun, etc.). The more dependencies the two words share, the higher the information content. However, as for context vectors, the words in W will cover all senses of w0. To discriminate between the senses, a word clustering algorithm is applied. Let W be the list of similar words ordered by degree of similarity to w0. A similarity tree T is initially created which consists of a single node w0. Next, for each i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, wi ∈ W is added as a child of w j in the tree T such that w j is the most similar word to wi among {w0, . . . , wi−1}. After a pruning step, each subtree rooted at w0 is considered as a distinct sense of w0.
In a subsequent approach, called the clustering by committee (CBC) algorithm [Lin and Pantel 2002], a different word clustering method was proposed. For each target word, a set of similar words was computed as above. To calculate the similarity, again, each word is represented as a feature vector, where each feature is the expression of a syntactic context in which the word occurs. Given a set of target words (e.g., all those occurring in a corpus), a similarity matrix S is built such that Sij contains the pairwise similarity between words wi and w j .
As a second step, given a set of words E, a recursive procedure is applied to determine sets of clusters, called committees, of the words in E. To this end, a standard clustering technique, that is, average-link clustering, is employed. In each step, residue words not covered by any committee (i.e., not similar enough to the centroid of each committee) are identiﬁed. Recursive attempts are made to discover more committees from residue words. Notice that, as above, committees conﬂate senses as each word belongs to a single committee.
Finally, as a sense discrimination step, each target word w ∈ E, again represented as a feature vector, is iteratively assigned to its most similar cluster, based on its similarity to the centroid of each committee. After a word w is assigned to a committee c, the intersecting features between w and elements in c are removed from the representation of w, so as to allow for the identiﬁcation of less frequent senses of the same word at a later iteration.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:29

CBC was assessed on the task of identifying WordNet word senses, attaining 61% precision and 51% recall. In contrast to most previous approaches, CBC outputs a ﬂat list of concepts (i.e., it does not provide a hierarchical structure for the clusters). Recently, a novel approach has been presented which performs word sense induction based on word triplets [Bordag 2006]. The method relies on the “one sense per collocation” assumption (cf. Section 3.8.1) and clusters cooccurrence triplets using their intersections (i.e., words in common) as features. Sense induction is performed with high precision (recall varies depending on part of speech and frequency).

4.3. Cooccurrence Graphs

A different view of word sense discrimination is provided by graph-based approaches,

which have been recently explored with a certain success. These approaches are based on the notion of a cooccurrence graph, that is, a graph G = (V , E) whose vertices V correspond to words in a text and edges E connect pairs of words which cooccur in a syntactic relation, in the same paragraph, or in a larger context.

The construction of a cooccurrence graph based on grammatical relations between

words in context was described by Widdows and Dorow [2002] (see also Dorow and Wid-

dows [2003]). Given a target ambiguous word w, a local graph Gw is built around w. By normalizing the adjacency matrix associated with Gw, we can interpret the graph as a Markov chain. The Markov clustering algorithm [van Dongen 2000] is then applied to

determine word senses, based on an expansion and an inﬂation step, aiming, respec-

tively, at inspecting new more distant neighbors and supporting more popular nodes. Subsequently, Ve´ronis [2004] proposed an ad hoc approach called HyperLex. First,
a cooccurrence graph is built such that nodes are words occurring in the paragraphs

of a text corpus in which a target word occurs, and an edge between a pair of words

is added to the graph if they cooccur in the same paragraph. Each edge is assigned a

weight according to the relative cooccurrence frequency of the two words connected by the edge. Formally, given an edge {i, j } its weight wij is given by

wij = 1 − max{P (wi | w j ), P (w j | wi)},

where P (wi | w j ) = f reqj f reqij , and freqij is the frequency of cooccurrence of words wi and w j and freq j is the frequency of w j within the text. As a result, words with high frequency of cooccurrence are assigned a weight close to zero, whereas words which rarely occur

together receive weights close to 1. Edges with a weight above a certain threshold are

discarded. Part of a cooccurrence graph is reported in Figure 16(a).

As a second step, an iterative algorithm is applied to the cooccurrence graph: at

each iteration, the node with highest relative degree in the graph is selected as a hub (based on the experimental ﬁnding that a node’s degree and its frequency in the original

text are highly correlated). As a result, all its neighbors are no longer eligible as hub

candidates. The algorithm stops when the relative frequency of the word corresponding

to the selected hub is below a ﬁxed threshold. The entire set of hubs selected is said to

represent the senses of the word of interest. Hubs are then linked to the target word

with zero-weight edges and the minimum spanning tree (MST) of the entire graph is

calculated (an example is shown in Figure 16(b)).

Finally, the MST is used to disambiguate speciﬁc instances of our target word. Let

W = (w1, w2, . . . , wi, . . . , wn) be a context in which wi is an instance of our target word. A score vector s is associated with each w j ∈ W ( j = i), such that its kth component sk

represents the contribution of the kth hub as follows:

⎧

⎨

1

sk = 1 + d (hk, w j ) if hk is an ancestor of w j in the MST

⎩ 0 otherwise,

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:30

R. Navigli

Fig. 16. (a) Part of a cooccurrence graph. (b) The minimum spanning tree for the target word barn.

where d (hk, w j ) is the distance between root hub hk and node w j (possibly, hk ≡ w j ). Next, all score vectors associated with all w j ∈ W ( j = i) are summed up and the hub which receives the maximum score is chosen as the most appropriate sense for wi.
An alternative graph-based algorithm for inducing word senses is PageRank [Brin

and Page 1998]. PageRank is a well-known algorithm developed for computing the

ranking of web pages, and is the main ingredient of the Google search engine. It has

been employed in several research areas for determining the importance of entities

whose relations can be represented in terms of a graph. In its weighted formulation,

the PageRank degree of a vertex vi ∈ V is given by the following formula:

P (vi) = (1 − d ) + d
v j →vi

w j i P (v j ), v j →vk w j k

where vj → vi denotes the existence of an edge from vj to vi, w ji is its weight, and d is a damping factor (usually set to 0.85) which models the probability of following a link to vi (second term) or randomly jumping to vi (ﬁrst term in the equation). Notice the recursive nature of the above formula: the PageRank of each vertex is iteratively computed until convergence.
In the adaptation of PageRank to unsupervised WSD (due to Agirre et al. [2006]), w ji is, as for HyperLex, a function of the probability of cooccurrence of words wi and w j . As a result of a run of the PageRank algorithm, the vertices are sorted by their PageRank value, and the best ranking ones are chosen as hubs of the target word.
HyperLex has been assessed by Ve´ronis [2004] in an information retrieval experiment, showing high performance on a small number of words. Further experiments on HyperLex and PageRank have been performed by Agirre et al. [2006], who tuned a number of parameters of the former algorithm, such as the number of adjacent vertices in a hub, the minimum frequencies of edges, vertices, hubs, etc. Experiments conducted on the nouns from the Senseval-3 lexical sample and all-words data sets (see Section 8.3) attained a performance close to state-of-the-art supervised systems for both algorithms. To compare with other systems, hubs were mapped to the word senses listed in WordNet, the reference computational lexicon adopted in the Senseval-3 competition.

5. KNOWLEDGE-BASED DISAMBIGUATION
The objective of knowledge-based or dictionary-based WSD is to exploit knowledge resources (such as dictionaries, thesauri, ontologies, collocations, etc.; see Section 2.2) to infer the senses of words in context. These methods usually have lower performance than their supervised alternatives, but they have the advantage of a wider coverage, thanks to the use of large-scale knowledge resources.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:31

Sense ke yn1
ke yn2 ke yn3

Table V. WordNet Sense Inventory for the First Three Senses of keyn Deﬁnition and Examples
Metal device shaped in such a way that when it is inserted into the appropriate lock the lock’s mechanism can be rotated
Something crucial for explaining; “the key to development is economic integration” Pitch of the voice; “he spoke in a low key”

The ﬁrst knowledge-based approaches to WSD date back to the 1970s and 1980s when experiments were conducted on extremely limited domains. Scaling up these works was the main difﬁculty at that time: the lack of large-scale computational resources prevented a proper evaluation, comparison and exploitation of those methods in endto-end applications.
In this section, we overview the main knowledge-based techniques, namely: the overlap of sense deﬁnitions, selectional restrictions, and structural approaches (semantic similarity measures and graph-based methods). Most approaches exploit information from WordNet or other resources, which we introduced in Section 2.2. A review of knowledge-based approaches can be found also in Manning and Schu¨ tze [1999] and Mihalcea [2006].
5.1. Overlap of Sense Deﬁnitions
A simple and intuitive knowledge-based approach relies on the calculation of the word overlap between the sense deﬁnitions of two or more target words. This approach is named gloss overlap or the Lesk algorithm after its author [Lesk 1986]. Given a twoword context (w1, w2), the senses of the target words whose deﬁnitions have the highest overlap (i.e., words in common) are assumed to be the correct ones. Formally, given two words w1 and w2, the following score is computed for each pair of word senses S1 ∈ Senses(w1) and S2 ∈ Senses(w2):
scoreLesk(S1, S2) =| gloss(S1) ∩ gloss(S2) |,
where gl oss(Si) is the bag of words in the textual deﬁnition of sense Si of wi. The senses which maximize the above formula are assigned to the respective words. However, this requires the calculation of | Senses(w1) | · | Senses(w2) | gloss overlaps. If we extend the algorithm to a context of n words, we need to determine i=1 n | Senses(wi) | overlaps. Given the exponential number of steps required, a variant of the Lesk algorithm is currently employed which identiﬁes the sense of a word w whose textual deﬁnition has the highest overlap with the words in the context of w. Formally, given a target word w, the following score is computed for each sense S of w:
scoreLeskV ar (S) =| context(w) ∩ gloss(S) |,
where context(w) is the bag of all content words in a context window around the target word w.
As an example, in Table V we show the ﬁrst three senses in WordNet of keyn and mark in italic the words which overlap with the following input sentence:
(g) I inserted the key and locked the door.
Sense 1 of key has 3 overlaps, whereas the other two senses have zero, so the ﬁrst sense is selected.
The original method achieved 50–70% accuracy (depending on the word), using a relatively ﬁne set of sense distinctions such as those found in a typical learner’s dictionary

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:32

R. Navigli

[Lesk 1986]. Unfortunately, Lesk’s approach is very sensitive to the exact wording of deﬁnitions, so the absence of a certain word can radically change the results.
Further, the algorithm determines overlaps only among the glosses of the senses being considered. This is a signiﬁcant limitation in that dictionary glosses tend to be fairly short and do not provide sufﬁcient vocabulary to relate ﬁne-grained sense distinctions.
Recently, Banerjee and Pedersen [2003] introduced a measure of extended gloss overlap, which expands the glosses of the words being compared to include glosses of concepts that are known to be related through explicit relations in the dictionary (e.g., hypernymy, meronymy, pertainymy, etc.). The range of relationships used to extend the glosses is a parameter, and can be chosen from any combination of WordNet relations. For each sense S of a target word w we estimate its score as10

scoreExtLesk(S) =

r el

| context(w) ∩ gloss(S ) |,

S :S → S or S≡S

where context(w) is, as above, the bag of all content words in a context window around the target word w and gloss(S ) is the bag of words in the textual deﬁnition of a sense S which is either S itself or related to S through a relation rel . The overlap scoring mechanism is also parametrized and can be adjusted to take into account gloss length (i.e. normalization) or to include function words.
Banerjee and Pedersen [2003] showed that disambiguation greatly beneﬁts from the use of gloss information from related concepts (jumping from 18.3% for the original Lesk algorithm to 34.6% accuracy for extended Lesk). However, the approach does not lead to state-of-the-art performance compared to competing knowledge-based systems.

5.2. Selectional Preferences
A historical type of knowledge-based algorithm is one which exploits selectional preferences to restrict the number of meanings of a target word occurring in context. Selectional preferences or restrictions are constraints on the semantic type that a word sense imposes on the words with which it combines in sentences (usually through grammatical relationships). For instance, the verb eat expects an animate entity as subject and an edible entity as its direct object. We can distinguish between selectional restrictions and preferences in that the former rule out senses that violate the constraint, whereas the latter (more typical of recent empirical work) tend to select those senses which better satisfy the requirements.
The easiest way to learn selectional preferences is to determine the semantic appropriateness of the association provided by a word-to-word relation. The simplest measure of this kind is frequency count. Given a pair of words w1 and w2 and a syntactic relation R (e.g., subject-verb, verb-object, etc.), this method counts the number of instances (R, w1, w2) in a corpus of parsed text, obtaining a ﬁgure Count(R, w1, w2) (see, e.g., Hindle and Rooth [1993]). Another estimation of the semantic appropriateness of a word-to-word relation is the conditional probability of word w1 given the other word w2 and the relation R: P (w1 | w2, R) = Count(w1,w2, R) Count(w2, R) .
To provide word-to-class or class-to-class models, that is, to generalize the knowledge acquired to semantic classes and relieve the data sparseness problem, manually crafted taxonomies such as WordNet can used to derive a mapping from words to conceptual classes. Several techniques have been devised, from measures of selectional association [Resnik 1993, 1997], to tree cut models using the minimum description length [Li and Abe 1998; McCarthy and Carroll 2003], hidden markov models [Abney and Light 1999],

10The scoring function presented here is a variant of that presented by Banerjee and Pedersen [2003].

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:33

class-based probability [Clark and Weir 2002; Agirre and Martinez 2001], Bayesian networks [Ciaramita and Johnson 2000], etc. Almost all these approaches exploit large corpora and model the selectional preferences of predicates by combining observed frequencies with knowledge about the semantic classes of their arguments (the latter obtained from corpora or dictionaries). Disambiguation is then performed with different means based on the strength of a selectional preference towards a certain conceptual class (i.e., sense choice).
A comparison of word-to-word, word-to-class, and class-to-class approaches was presented by Agirre and Martinez [2001], who found out that the coverage grows as we move from the former to the latter methods (26% for word-to-word preferences, 86.7% for word-to-class, 97.3% for class-to-class methods), and that precision decreases accordingly (from 95.9% to 66.9% to 66.6%, respectively).
In general, we can say that approaches to WSD based on selectional restrictions have not been found to perform as well as Lesk-based methods or the most frequent sense heuristic (see Section 7.2.2).

5.3. Structural Approaches
Since the availability of computational lexicons like WordNet, a number of structural approaches have been developed to analyze and exploit the structure of the concept network made available in such lexicons. The recognition and measurement of patterns, both in a local and a global context, can be collocated in the ﬁeld of structural pattern recognition [Fu 1982; Bunke and Sanfeliu 1990], which aims at classifying data (speciﬁcally, senses) based on the structural interrelationships of features. We present two main approaches of this kind: similarity-based and graph-based methods.

5.3.1. Similarity Measures. Since the early 1990s, when WordNet was introduced, a number of measures of semantic similarity have been developed to exploit the network of semantic connections between word senses. Given a measure of semantic similarity deﬁned as

score : SensesD × SensesD → [0, 1],

where SensesD is the full set of senses listed in a reference lexicon, we can deﬁne a general disambiguation framework based on our similarity measure. We disambiguate a target word wi in a text T = (w1, . . . , wn) by choosing the sense Sˆ of wi which maximizes the following sum:

Sˆ = argmax

max score(S, S ).

S∈SensesD (wi ) w j ∈T :w j =wi S ∈SensesD (w j )

Given a sense S of our target word wi, the formula sums the contribution of the most appropriate sense of each context word w j = wi. The sense with the highest sum is chosen. Similar disambiguation strategies can be applied (e.g., thresholds can be introduced; cf. Pedersen et al. [2005]). We now turn to the most well-known measures of semantic similarity in the literature.
Rada et al. [1989] introduced a simple metric based on the calculation of the shortest distance in WordNet between pairs of word senses. The hypothesis is that, given a pair of words w and w occurring in the same context, choosing the senses that minimize the distance between them selects the most appropriate meanings. The measure is deﬁned as follows:

scoreRada(Sw, Sw ) = d (Sw, Sw ),

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:34

R. Navigli

where d (Sw, Sw ) is the shortest distance between Sw and Sw (i.e., the number of edges of the shortest path over the lexicon network). The shortest path is calculated on the WordNet taxonomy, so it is intended to include only hypernymy edges.
Sussna’s [1993] approach is based on the observation that concepts deep in a taxonomy (e.g., limousinen and carn) appear to be more closely related to each another than those in the upper part of the same taxonomy (e.g., locationn and entityn). An edge in the WordNet noun taxonomy is viewed as a pair of two directed edges representing inverse relations (e.g., kind-of and has-kind). The measure is deﬁned as follows:
scoreSussna(Sw, Sw ) = wR (Sw, Sw ) + wR−1 (Sw , Sw) , 2D
where R is a relation, R−1 its inverse, D is the overall depth of the noun taxonomy, and each relation edge is weighted based on the following formula:
wR (Sw, Sw ) = maxR − maxR − minR , nR (Sw)
where maxR and minR are a maximum and minimum weight that we want to assign to relation R and nR(Sw) is the number of edges of kind R outgoing from Sw.
Inspired by Rada et al. [1989], Leacock and Chodorow [1998] developed a similarity measure based on the distance of two senses Sw and Sw . They focused on hypernymy links and scaled the path length by the overall depth D of the taxonomy:
scoreLch(Sw, Sw ) = −log d (Sw, Sw ) . 2D
One of the issues of distance-based measures is that they do not take into account the density of concepts in a subtree rooted at a common ancestor. Agirre and Rigau [1996] introduced a measure called conceptual density, which measures the density of the senses of a word context in the subhierarchy of a speciﬁc synset. Given a synset S, a mean number of hyponyms (specializations) per sense nhyp, and provided that S includes in its subhierarchy m senses of words to be disambiguated, the conceptual density of S is calculated as follows:
CD(S, m) = i=0 m−1 nhypi0.20 , descendants(S)
where d escend ants(S) is the total number of descendants in the noun hierarchy of S and 0.20 is a smoothing exponent, whereas i ranges over all possible senses of words in the subhierarchy of S.
The conceptual density of S is calculated for all hypernyms of all senses of the nouns in context. The highest conceptual density among all the synsets determines a set of sense choices: the senses included in its subhierarchy are chosen as interpretations of the respective words in context. The rest of senses of those words are deleted from the hierarchy, and the procedure is then iterated for the remaining ambiguous words.
In Figure 17 we show the basic idea of conceptual density. We indicate the four senses of our target word w with big dots, and the senses of context words with small dots. In the example, each sense of w belongs to a different subhierarchy of the WordNet noun taxonomy.
Resnik [1995] introduced a notion of information content shared by words in context. The proposed measure determines the speciﬁcity of the concept that subsumes the words in the WordNet taxonomy and is based on the idea that, the more speciﬁc the

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:35

Fig. 17. An example of conceptual density for a word context, which includes a target word with four senses. Senses of words in context are represented as small dots, senses of the target word as big dots.
concept that subsumes two or more words, the more semantically related they are assumed to be. His measure is deﬁned as
scoreRes(Sw, Sw ) = −l o g ( p(l so(Sw, Sw ))),
where lso(Sw, Sw ) is the lowest superordinate (i.e., most speciﬁc common ancestor in the noun taxonomy) of Sw and Sw , and p(S) is the probability of encountering an instance of sense S in a reference corpus. We note that this measure, together with the measures that we present hereafter, does not only exploit the structure of the reference dictionary, but also incorporates an additional kind of knowledge, which comes from text corpora.
Jiang and Conrath’s [1997] approach also uses the notion of information content, but in the form of the conditional probability of encountering an instance of a child sense given an instance of an ancestor sense. The measure takes into account the information content of the two senses, as well as that of their most speciﬁc ancestor in the noun taxonomy:
scoreJcn(Sw, Sw ) = 2 log( p(lso(Sw, Sw ))) − (log( p(Sw)) + log( p(Sw ))).
Finally, Lin’s [1998b] similarity measure is based on his theory of similarity between arbitrary objects. It is essentially Jiang and Conrath’s [1997] measure, proposed in a different fashion:
scoreLin(Sw, Sw ) = 2log( p(lso(Sw, Sw ))) . log( p(Sw)) + log( p(Sw ))
Different similarity measures have been assessed in comparative experiments to determine which prove to be most effective. Budanitsky and Hirst [2006] found that Jiang and Conrath’s [1997] measure is superior in the correction of word spelling errors compared to the measures proposed by Leacock and Chodorow [1998], Lin [1998b], Resnik [1995], and Hirst and St-Onge [1998] (the latter is introduced in the next section). Pedersen et al. [2005] made similar considerations and found that Jcn, together with the extended measure of gloss overlap presented in Section 5.1, outperforms the other measures in the disambiguation of 1754 noun instances of the Senseval-2 lexical sample task (see Section 8.2). We report the results of this latter experiment in Table VI. Most of the above-mentioned measures are implemented in the WordNet::Similarity package [Pedersen et al. 2004].
5.3.2. Graph-Based Approaches. In this section we present a number of approaches based on the exploitation of graph structures to determine the most appropriate senses for words in context. Most of these approaches are related or inspired by the notion of lexical chain. A lexical chain [Halliday and Hasan 1976; Morris and Hirst 1991] is a sequence of semantically related words w1, . . . , wn in a text, such that wi is related to
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:36

Table VI. Performance of Semantic Similarity Measures and a Lesk-Based Gloss Overlap Measure on 1754 Noun Instances from the Senseval-2 Lexical Sample Data Set (cf.
Section 8.2)
Res Jcn Lin Lch Hso Lsk
Accuracy 29.5 38.0 33.1 30.5 31.6 39.1
Note: Res = Resnik [1995]; Jcn = Jiang and Conrath [1998]; Lin = Lin [1998b]; Lch = Leacock and Chodorow [1998]; Hso = Hirst and St-Onge [1998]; Lsk = Lesk [1986].

R. Navigli

Fig. 18. Some lexical chains in a portion of text.
wi+1 by a lexicosemantic relation (e.g., is-a, has-part, etc.). Lexical chains determine contexts and contribute to the continuity of meaning and the coherence of a discourse. For instance, the following are examples of lexical chains: Rome → city → inhabitant, eat → dish → vegetable → aubergine, etc.
These structures have been applied to the analysis of discourse cohesion [Morris and Hirst 1991], text summarization [Barzilay and Elhadad 1997], the correction of malapropisms [Hirst and St-Onge 1998], etc. Algorithms for computing lexical chains often perform disambiguation before inferring which words are semantically related.
We can view lexical chains as a global counterpart of the measures of semantic similarity (presented in previous subsection) which, in contrast, are usually applied in local contexts. Figure 18 illustrates a portion of text with potential lexical chains between related words.
A ﬁrst computational model of lexical chains was introduced by Hirst and St-Onge [1998]. The strength of a lexical chain connecting two word senses Sw and Sw of words w and w , respectively, is computed as:
scoreHso(Sw, Sw ) = C − d (Sw, Sw ) − k · turns(Sw, Sw ),
where C and k are constants, d is the shortest distance between the two senses in the WordNet taxonomy (as above), and turns is the number of times the chain “changes direction.” A change of direction is due to the use of an inverse relation (e.g., passing from generalization to specialization with the alternation of a kind-of and has-kind relation). For instance, the left chain in Figure 19 does not contain any change of direction, in contrast to the right chain, which contains one (from kind-of to its inverse has-kind). The latter chain scores as follows: scoreHso(appl e1n, carrot1n) = C − 4 − k · 1.
The algorithm, however, suffers from inaccurate WSD, since a word is immediately disambiguated in a greedy fashion the ﬁrst time it is encountered. Barzilay and Elhadad [1997] dealt with the inaccuracy of the original approach by keeping all possible interpretations until all the words to be chained have been considered. The computational inefﬁciency of this approach, due to the processing of many possible combinations
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:37

Fig. 19. Two examples of lexical chains.
of word senses in the text, was overcome by Silber and McCoy [2003] who presented an efﬁcient linear-time algorithm to compute lexical chains.
Based on these works, Galley and McKeown [2003] developed a method consisting of two stages. First, a graph is built representing all possible interpretations of the target words in question. The text is processed sequentially, comparing each word against all words previously read. If a relation exists between the senses of the current word and any possible sense of a previous word, a connection is established between the appropriate words and senses. The strength of the connection is a function of the type of relationship and of the distance between the words in the text (in terms of words, sentences, and paragraphs). Words are represented as nodes in the graph and semantic relations as weighted edges.
In the disambiguation stage, all occurrences of a given word are collected together. For each sense of a target word, the strength of all connections involving that sense are summed, giving that sense a uniﬁed score. The sense with the highest uniﬁed score is chosen as the correct sense for the target word. In subsequent stages the actual connections comprising the winning uniﬁed score are used as a basis for computing the lexical chains. Galley and McKeown [2003] reported a 62.1% accuracy in the disambiguation of nouns from a subset of SemCor.
Among the approaches inspired by the notion of lexical chains, we cite Harabagiu et al. [1999] (and subsequent works), where a set of lexicosemantic heuristics are used to disambiguate dictionary glosses: each heuristic deals with a speciﬁc phenomenon of language (e.g., monosemy, linguistic parallelism, etc.), some of which can be conﬁgured as speciﬁc kinds of lexical chains.
Mihalcea et al. [2004] presented an approach based on the use of the PageRank algorithm (cf. Section 4.3) to study the structure of the lexicon network and identify those nodes (senses) which are more relevant in context. The method builds a graph that represents all the possible senses of words in a text and interconnects pairs of senses with meaningful relations. Relations include those from WordNet plus a coordinate relation (which connects concepts having the same hypernym). After the application of PageRank to the graph, the highest-ranking sense of each word in context is chosen.
Navigli and Velardi [2005] recently proposed the Structural Semantic Interconnections (SSI) algorithm, a development of lexical chains based on the encoding of a contextfree grammar of valid semantic interconnection patterns. First, given a word context W , SSI builds a subgraph of the WordNet lexicon which includes all the senses of words in W and intermediate concepts which occur in at least one valid lexical chain connecting a pair of senses in W . Second, the algorithm selects those senses for the words in context which maximize the degree of connectivity of the induced subgraph of the WordNet lexicon. A key feature of the algorithm is that it outputs justiﬁcations for sense choices in terms of semantic graphs which can be used as a support for the validation of manual and automatic sense annotations [Navigli 2006a, 2006b]. SSI outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised systems in the Senseval-3 all-words and the Semeval-2007 coarse-grained all-words competition (cf. Section 8).
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:38

R. Navigli

6. OTHER APPROACHES 6.1. Determining Word Sense Dominance

It has been noted that, given a word, the frequency distribution of its senses is highly
skewed in texts [Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig 2000], thus affecting the performance of
WSD. Methods for the determination of word sense dominance perform type-based disambiguation (cf. Section 2.4) based on this observation.
McCarthy et al. [2004, 2007] proposed an unsupervised method for automatically
ranking the senses of ambiguous words from raw text. Key in their approach is the
observation that distributionally similar neighbors often provide cues about the senses
of a word. Assuming that a set of neighbors is available for a target word, sense ranking
is equivalent to quantifying the degree of similarity among the neighbors and the sense
descriptions of the polysemous target word. Let N (w) = {n1, n2, . . . , nk} be the k most (distributionally) similar words to an am-
biguous target word w and SensesD(w) = {S1, S2, . . . , Sn} the usual set of senses for w. Distributional similarity of neighbors in N (w) is calculated with Lin’s [1998a] method for the automatic construction of thesauri (as described in Section 4.2; see also Lee
[1999] for an overview).
For each sense Si of w and for each neighbor n j , the algorithm selects the neighbor’s sense which has the highest WordNet similarity score (simWN) with regard to Si. The similarity simWN between pairs of senses is calculated with a measure of semantic similarity which weights the contribution that each neighbor provides to the various
senses of the target word (Jcn was found to perform best among different similarity
measures; cf. Section 5.3.1).
The ranking score of sense Si is then determined as a function of the semantic similarity score and the distributional similarity score (simdist) between the target word and the neighbors:

scorePrev(Si) = simdist(w, n) simWN(Si, n) ,

n∈N (w)

simWN(S j , n)
S j ∈SensesD (w)

where

simWN(Si, n) = max simWN(Si, Nx ).
Nx ∈SensesD (n)

For example, given a target word starn, let us assume that the set of neighbors N (starn) = {actorn, footballern, planetn} (a simpliﬁed version of the example in McCarthy et al. [2007]). Suppose the distributional similarity was calculated as follows: simdist(starn, actorn) = 0.22, simdist(starn, footballern) = 0.12, and simdist(starn, planetn) =0.08. Now, we can calculate the score for each sense of starn (here we show the calculation of the two best-ranking senses):

scorePrev star1n scorePrev star5n

= 0.22 · 0.01 + 0.12 · 0.01 + 0.08 · 0.68 = 0.068,

0.48

0.57

0.93

= 0.22 · 0.42 + 0.12 · 0.53 + 0.08 · 0.02 = 0.314,

0.48

0.57

0.93

where star1n denotes the sense of celestial body and star5n the celebrity sense of starn (the values of simWN are taken from the original example of McCarthy et al. [2007]). As a result, the predominant sense is simply the sense with the highest-ranking scorePrev (star5n in the example) and can be consequently used to perform type-based disambiguation.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:39

Mohammad and Hirst [2006] presented a different approach to the acquisition of the predominant sense. Rather than building a thesaurus from an unlabeled corpus, they relied on a preexisting thesaurus, namely, the Macquarie Thesaurus [Bernard 1986]. Given the categories encoded in the thesaurus, they built a word-category cooccurrence matrix M , such that Mij is the number of times word wi occurs in a text corpus in a predetermined window around a term in the thesaurus category C j . The strength of association between a sense of a target word and its cooccurring words (i.e., its neighbors) is not calculated with the aid of WordNet, as McCarthy et al. [2004] did. The degree of similarity is rather calculated by applying a statistic on the contingency table M (the authors experimented on a number of measures, such as Dice, cosine, odds, etc.). Finally, given a target word w, they proposed four different measures to determine which sense is predominant in a text based on implicit or explicit disambiguation and weighted or unweighted voting of cooccurring words. The best-performing measure, which combines explicit disambiguation with weighted voting of cooccurring words, is deﬁned as follows:
scorePrev(Ci) = | {W ∈ Xw : Sense(W, w) = Ci} | , | Xw |
where W is the set of words cooccurring in a window around a speciﬁc occurrence of w, Xw is the set of all such W , Ci is a category in the thesaurus which includes the target word w (i.e., a “sense” of w), and Sense(W, w) is the category C of the target word w which maximizes the sum of the strengths of association of C with the co-occurring words in W .
Finally, we cite a third approach to the determination of predominant senses which relies on word association [Lapata and Keller 2007]. Given a sense S of a word w, the method counts the cooccurrences in a given corpus of w with the other synonyms of S (according to WordNet). As a result, a ranking of the senses of w is obtained and the best-ranking sense can be used as the predominant sense in the corpus.

6.2. Domain-Driven Disambiguation

Domain-driven disambiguation [Gliozzo et al. 2004; Buitelaar et al. 2006] is a WSD

methodology that makes use of domain information. The sense of a target word is chosen

based on a comparison between the domains of the context words and the domain

of the target sense. To this end, WordNet domain labels are typically employed (cf.

Section 2.2.1).

This approach achieves good precision and possibly low recall, due to the fact that

domain information can be used to disambiguate mainly domain words. Domain infor-

mation is represented in terms of domain vectors, that is, vectors whose components

represent information from distinct domains. Given a word sense S, a synset vector is

deﬁned as S = (R(D1, S), R(D2, S), . . . , R(Dd , S)), where Di are the domains available (i ∈ {1, . . . , d }) and R(Di, S) is deﬁned as follows:

⎧ ⎨ 1/ | Dom(S) | if Di ∈ Dom(S),

R(Di, S) = ⎩ 1/d 0

if Dom(S) = { FACTOTUM }, otherwise,

where Dom(S) is the set of labels assigned to sense S in the WordNet domain labels resource and the FACTOTUM label represents the absence of domain pertinence. For instance, Dom(authorityn1) = { ADMINISTRATION, LAW, POLITICS}; thus the vector associated to authority1n is (0, . . . , 0, 1/3, 0, . . . , 0, 1/3, 0, . . . , 0, 1/3, 0, . . . , 0). Given a target word

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:40

R. Navigli

w occurring in a text T , the most appropriate sense Sˆ of w is selected as follows:

Sˆ = argmax
Si ∈SensesD (w)

P (Si | w)sim(Si, T) , S∈SensesD(w) P (S | w)sim(S, T)

where sim is the measure of cosine similarity (cf. Section 4.1), P (Si | w) describes the probability of sense Si for word w based on the distribution of sense annotations in the SemCor corpus (cf. Section 2.2.2), and T is a domain vector of a window of T around word w, estimated with an unsupervised method, namely, the Gaussian mixture approach. Speciﬁc parameters are estimated from a large-scale corpus using the Expectation
Maximization (EM) algorithm. The use of P (Si | w) makes this approach supervised, as it exploits a sense-labeled
corpus to determine the probability of sense Si for word w. A modiﬁed, unsupervised version of this approach [Strapparava et al. 2004] performed best among unsupervised
systems in the Senseval-3 all-words task (see Section 8.3).
The interesting aspect of domain-driven disambiguation as well as methods for de-
termining word sense dominance is that they shift the focus from the linguistic under-
standing to a domain-oriented type-based vision of sense ambiguity. We believe that
this direction will be further explored in the future, especially with the aim of enabling
semantic-aware applications (see also Section 10).

6.3. WSD from Cross-Lingual Evidence
Finally, we introduce an approach to disambiguation based on the evidence from translation information. The strategy consists of disambiguating target words by labeling them with the appropriate translation.
The main idea behind this approach is that the plausible translations of a word in context restrict its possible senses to a subset [Resnik and Yarowsky 1997, 1999]. For instance, the English word sentence can be translated to the French peine or phrase depending on the context. However, this method does not necessarily performs a full disambiguation, as it is not uncommon that different meanings of the same word have the same translation (e.g., both the senses of wing as an organ and as part of a building translate to the Italian ala). In their seminal article, Resnik and Yarowsky [1997] proposed that only senses which are lexicalized cross-linguistically in a minimum set of languages should be considered. For instance, table is translated as table in French and tavola in Italian, both in the sense of piece of furniture, and a company of people at a table. This regular polysemy is preserved across the three languages, and allows for the identiﬁcation of a single sense. To implement this proposal, Ide [2000] suggested the use of a coherence index for identifying the tendency to lexicalize senses differently across languages.
Several methods have been described in the literature based on cross-lingual evidence. Brown et al. [1991] proposed an unsupervised approach which, after performing word alignment on a parallel corpus, determines the most appropriate translation for a target word according to the most informative feature from a set of contextual features.
Gale et al. [1992d] proposed a method which uses parallel corpora for the automatic creation of a sense-tagged data set. Given a target word, each sentence in the source language is tagged with the translation of the word in the target language. A naive Bayes classiﬁer is then trained with the resulting data set and applied in a WSD task. Experiments show a very high accuracy (above 90%) on a small number of words.
More recently, Diab [2003] presented an unsupervised approach for sense tagging parallel corpora which clusters source words translating to the same target word and

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:41

disambiguates them based on a measure of similarity. Finally, the method assigns the most similar sense tag to the target word occurring in the source corpus (and possibly projects the sense assignment to the corresponding word in the target corpus).
Ide et al. [2002] and Tuﬁs et al. [2004] presented a knowledge-based approach which exploits EuroWordNet (cf. Section 2.2.1). Given two aligned words in a parallel corpus, they sense tag them with those synsets of the two words which are mapped through EuroWordNet’s interlingual index. The most frequent sense baseline is used as a backoff in case more than one sense of the word in the source language maps to senses of the word in the target language. 75% accuracy is achieved in disambiguating a manually tagged portion of Orwell’s 1984.
In recent studies, it has been found that approaches that use cross-lingual evidence for WSD attain state-of-the-art performance in all-words disambiguation (e.g., Ng et al. [2003]; Chklovski et al. [2004]; Chan and Ng [2005]). However, the main problem of these approaches lies in the knowledge acquisition bottleneck: there is a lack of parallel corpora for several languages, which can potentially be relieved by collecting corpora on the Web [Resnik and Smith 2003]. To overcome this problem, Dagan and Itai [1994] proposed the use of a bilingual lexicon to ﬁnd all possible translations (considered as the set of target senses) of an ambiguous word occurring in a syntactic relation, and then use statistics on the translations in a target corpus to perform disambiguation.

7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
We present here the evaluation measures and baselines employed for in vitro evaluation of WSD systems, that is, as if they were stand-alone, independent applications. However, one of the real objectives of WSD is to demonstrate that it improves the performance of applications such as information retrieval, machine translation, etc. The evaluation of WSD as a module embedded in applications is called in vivo or end-to-end evaluation. We will discuss this second kind of evaluation in later sections.

7.1. Evaluation Measures

The assessment of word sense disambiguation systems is usually performed in terms of evaluation measures borrowed from the ﬁeld of information retrieval, that we introduce hereafter.
Let T = (w1, . . . , wn) be a test set and A an “answer” function that associates with each word wi ∈ T the appropriate set of senses from the dictionary D (i.e., A(i) ⊆ SensesD(wi)). Then, given the sense assignments A (i) ∈ SensesD(wi) ∪ { } provided by an automatic WSD system11 (i ∈ {1, . . . , n}), we can deﬁne coverage C as the percentage of items in the test set for which the system provided a sense assignment that is:

C = # answers provided = | {i ∈ {1, . . . , n} : A (i) = } | ,

# total answers to provide

n

where we indicate with the case in which the system does not provide an answer for a speciﬁc word wi (i.e., in that case we assume that A (i) = ). The total number of answers is given by n =| T |. The precision P of a system is computed as the percentage
of correct answers given by the automatic system, that is:

P = # correct answers provided = | {i ∈ {1, . . . , n} : A (i) ∈ A(i)} | .

# answers provided

| {i ∈ {1, . . . , n} : A (i) = } |

11We assume that the annotations to be assessed assign to each word a single sense from the inventory. We note that more than one annotation can be allowed by extending this notation.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:42

R. Navigli

Precision determines how good are the answers given by the system being assessed. Recall R is deﬁned as the number of correct answers given by the automatic system over the total number of answers to be given:

R = # correct answers provided = | {i ∈ {1, . . . , n} : A (i) ∈ A(i)} | .

# total answers to provide

n

According to the above deﬁnitions, we have that R ≤ P . When coverage is 100%, we have that P = R. In the WSD literature, recall is also referred to as accuracy, although these are two different measures in the machine learning and information retrieval literature.
Finally, a measure which determines the weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall, called the F1-measure or balanced F -score, is deﬁned as

F1 = 2P R . P+R

The F1-measure is a specialization of a general formula, the Fα-score, deﬁned as

1 Fα = 1

(β2 + 1)P R

1= 2

,

α P + (1 − α) R β P + R

where α = 1/(β2 + 1). The F1-measure is obtained by choosing β = 1 (or, equivalently, α = 12 ), thus equally balancing precision and recall. F1 is useful to compare systems with a coverage lower than 100%. Note that an easy-to-build system with P = 100% and almost-zero recall would get around 50% performance if we used a simple arithmetic mean ( P+R 2 ), whereas a harmonic mean such as F1 is dramatically penalized by low values of either precision or recall.
It has been argued that the above measures do not reﬂect the ability of systems to output a degree of conﬁdence for a given sense choice. In this direction, Resnik and Yarowsky [1999] proposed an evaluation metric which weighs misclassiﬁcation errors by the distance between the selected and correct senses. As a result, if the chosen sense is a ﬁne-grained distinction of the correct sense, this error will be penalised less heavily than between coarser sense distinctions. Even more reﬁned metrics, such as the receiver operation characteristic (ROC), have been proposed [Cohn 2003]. However these metrics are not often used, also for reasons of comparison with previously established results, mostly measured in terms of precision, recall, and F1.

7.2. Baselines A baseline is a standard method to which the performance of different approaches is compared. Here we present two basic baselines, the random baseline (Section 7.2.1) and the ﬁrst sense baseline (Section 7.2.2). Other baselines have also been employed in the literature, such as the Lesk approach (cf. Section 5.1).
7.2.1. The Random Baseline. Let D be the reference dictionary and T = (w1, w2, . . . , wn) be a test set such that word wi (i ∈ {1, . . . , n}) is a content word in the corpus. The chance or random baseline consists in the random choice of a sense from those available for each word wi. Under the uniform distribution, for each word wi the probability of success of such a choice is 1 |SensesD(wi)| .
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:43

The accuracy of the random baseline is obtained by averaging over all the content words in the test set T :

1n AccChance =

1 .

n i=1 | SensesD(wi) |

7.2.2. The First Sense Baseline. The ﬁrst sense baseline (or most frequent sense baseline)

is based on a ranking of word senses. This baseline consists in choosing the ﬁrst sense

according to such a ranking for each word in a corpus, independent of its context.

For instance, in WordNet, senses of the same word are ranked based on the frequency

of occurrence of each sense in the SemCor corpus (cf. Section 2.2.2). Let SC be the

SemCor corpus, ASC(i) the set of manual annotations for the ith word in the corpus,

and

let

Count(wpj )

be

a

function

that

counts

the

number

of

occurrences

of

sense

wj
p

in

SC, such that

j

|

{i

∈

{1,

...,

|

SC

|}

:

wj
p

∈

ASC (i )}

|

Count wp =

.

| SC |

Given a word sense wpj , the counts determine the following ranking:

RankF S

wj
p

=

Count

wj
p

|SensesD(wp)| i .

i=1

Count wp

Now let us assume that word senses are ordered by a ranking based on occurrence

counts,

that

is,

w1
p

occurs

equally

or

more

frequently

than

w2p,

and

so

on

(possibly

remaining senses with no occurrence are ordered randomly). Let T = (w1, w2, . . . , wn)

be a test set and A be the set of sense tags manually assigned to T by one or more

annotators, that is, A(i) ⊆ SensesD(wi). The accuracy of the ﬁrst sense baseline is

calculated as follows:

Acc | {i ∈ {1, . . . , n} : w F S = i1 ∈ A(i)} | . n

In other words, this is the accuracy of assigning the sense of each word which is most frequent in SemCor (or, analogously, in another reference sense-tagged data set).

7.3. Lower and Upper Bounds
Lower and upper bounds are performance ﬁgures that indicate the range within which the performance of any system should fall. Speciﬁcally, a lower bound usually measures a performance obtained with an extremely simple method and which any system should be able to exceed. A typical lower bound is the random baseline. Gale et al. [1992a] proposed the selection of the most likely sense as a lower bound (i.e., the ﬁrst sense baseline). This baseline poses serious difﬁculties to WSD systems as it is often hard to beat, as we will discuss in the next section.
An upper bound speciﬁes the highest performance reasonably attainable. In WSD, a typical upper bound is the interannotator agreement or intertagger agreement (ITA), that is, the percentage of words tagged with the same sense by two or more human annotators. The interannotator agreement on coarse-grained, possibly binary, sense inventories is calculated around 90% [Gale et al. 1992a; Navigli et al. 2007], whereas on ﬁne-grained, WordNet-style sense inventories the inter-annotator agreement is estimated between 67% and 80% [Chklovski and Mihalcea 2003; Snyder and Palmer 2004; Palmer et al. 2007].

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:44

R. Navigli

As Gale et al. [1992a] stated, it is unclear how to interpret a performance which beats the interannotator agreement: if humans cannot agree more than a certain percentage of times, what does it mean if a system overcomes that ﬁgure and is more accurate? A possible answer might be that some sense assignments in a data set or some distinctions in the adopted sense inventory are disputable. This poses a problem especially for ﬁnegrained WSD: it might be that the task itself needs to be rethought (we further discuss this point in Sections 8.4 and 8.5).
Another upper bound that turns out to be useful is the oracle. An oracle is a hypothetic system which is always supposed to know the correct answer (i.e., the appropriate sense choice) among those available. An oracle constitutes a good upper bound to compare the performance of ensemble methods (cf. Section 3.7). Its accuracy is determined by the number of word instances for which at least one of the systems output the correct sense. As a result, given the output of ﬁrst-order WSD systems, the oracle performance provides the maximum hypothetical performance of any combination method aiming at improving the results of the single systems.
Another use of the oracle is in calculating the impact of WSD on applications: in fact, an oracle which performs 100% accurate disambiguation (e.g., in disambiguating queries, document bases, translations, etc.) allows it to determine the maximum (theoretical) degree of impact of WSD on the application of interest (for instance, what is the maximum improvement when performing 100%-accurate disambiguation in an information retrieval task?).

8. EVALUATION: THE SENSEVAL/SEMEVAL COMPETITIONS
Comparing and evaluating different WSD systems is extremely difﬁcult, because of the different test sets, sense inventories, and knowledge resources adopted. Before the organization of speciﬁc evaluation campaigns, which we introduce in this section, most systems were assessed on in-house, often small-scale, data sets. Therefore, most of the pre-Senseval results are not comparable with subsequent approaches in the ﬁeld.
Senseval12 (now renamed Semeval) is an international word sense disambiguation competition, held every three years since 1998. The objective of the competition is to perform a comparative evaluation of WSD systems in several kinds of tasks, including all-words and lexical sample WSD for different languages, and, more recently, new tasks such as semantic role labeling, gloss WSD, lexical substitution, etc. The systems submitted for evaluation to these competitions usually integrate different techniques and often combine supervised and knowledge-based methods (especially for avoiding bad performance in lack of training examples). The Senseval workshops are the best reference to study the recent trends of WSD and the future research directions in the ﬁeld. Moreover, they lead to the periodic release of data sets of high value for the research community.
We now review and discuss the four competitions held between 1998 and 2007. A review of the ﬁrst three Senseval competitions can also be found in Martinez [2004] and Palmer et al. [2006].
8.1. Senseval-1
The ﬁrst edition of Senseval took place in 1998 at Herstmonceux Castle, Sussex [Kilgarriff 1998; Kilgarriff and Palmer 2000]. The importance of this edition is given by the fact that WSD researchers joined their efforts and discussed several issues

12http://www.senseval.org.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:45

Table VII. Performance of the Highest-Ranking Systems Participating in the Lexical Sample and

All-Words Task at Senseval-2 (When two ﬁgures are reported, they stand for precision/recall (see

Section 7.1). U/S stand for unsupervised and supervised, respectively.)

Lexical Sample

All Words

Accuracy

System

U/S Accuracy

System

U/S

64.2

JHU

S

69.0

SMUaw

S

63.8

SMUI

S

63.6

CNTS-Antwerp

S

62.9

KUNLP

S

61.8

Sinequa-LIA

S

61.7

Stanford—CS224N

S 57.5/56.9 UNED—AW-U2

U

59.4

TALP

S 55.6/55.0 UNED—AW-U

U

47.6

MFS BL

S

57.0

MFS BL

S

concerning the lexicon to be adopted, the annotation of training and test sets, the evaluation procedure, etc.
Senseval-1 consisted of a lexical-sample task for three languages: English, French, and Italian. A total of 25 systems from 23 research groups participated in the competition. Annotation for the English language was performed with respect to the HECTOR sense inventory (cf. Section 2.2). The English test set contained 8400 instances of 35 target words. The best systems performed with between 74% and 78% accuracy (cf. Section 7.1 for an introduction to evaluation measures). The baseline, based on the most frequent sense (cf. Section 7.2.2), achieved a 57% accuracy. The best performing systems were
—JHU [Yarowsky 2000]. This system was a supervised algorithm based on hierarchies of decision lists. It exploits a full set of collocational, morphological, and syntactic features to classify the examples and assigns weights to different kinds of features. This system obtained the best score after resubmission (78.1%).
—Durham [Hawkins and Nettleton 2000]. This system consisted of a hybrid approach relying on different types of knowledge: the frequency of senses in training data, manually crafted clue words from the training context, and contextual similarity between senses. The system learns contextual scores from ancestor nodes in the WordNet hierarchy to disambiguate all words in a given sentence. Together with contextual information, frequency information is used to measure the likelihood of each possible sense appearing in the text. The system achieved the best score after the ﬁrst submission of systems (77.1%).
—Tilburg [Veenstra et al. 2000]. This method used memory-based learning (cf. Section 3.5), obtaining a 75.1% accuracy. A word expert was learned for each target word in the test set. The word experts were built on training data by using 10-fold crossvalidation.
Decision lists with the addition of some hierarchical structure were the most successful approach in the ﬁrst edition of the Senseval competition. Notice that, although a ﬁgure of 78% accuracy is a relatively high achievement, the task concerned the disambiguation of a limited number of words (35) in a lexical sample style evaluation.
8.2. Senseval-2
Senseval-2 [Edmonds and Cotton 2001] took place in Toulouse (France) in 2001. Two main tasks were organized in 12 different languages: all-words and lexical sample WSD (see Section 2). Overall, 93 systems from 34 research groups participated in the competition. The WordNet 1.7 sense inventory was adopted for English.
In Table VII we report the performance of the highest-ranking systems participating in the two tasks. The performance was generally lower than in Senseval-1, probably due

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:46

R. Navigli

to the ﬁne granularity of the adopted sense inventory. Supervised systems outperformed unsupervised approaches. The best-performing systems in the English lexical sample task (over 4300 test instances) were
—JHU [Florian et al. 2002]. This system was an ensemble combination of heterogeneous classiﬁers (vector cosine similarity, Bayesian models, and decision lists). Different combination strategies were adopted: equal weight, probability interpolation, rank-averaged, etc. The classiﬁers used a set of features extracted from the context, including grammatical relations, regular expressions over part-of-speech tags in a window around the target word, etc. This system scored best with a 64.2% accuracy. The use of voting schemes is common to the Stanford-CS224N system, ranking fourth.
—SMUI [Mihalcea 2002b]. Similar to the Tilburg system [Veenstra et al. 2000], this approach is based on instance-based learning for classifying a target word. The original aspect of this system is in the feature selection phase, performed using crossvalidation in the training set: for each word, only the features that contribute to a performance increase are kept. This system ranked second, with 63.8% accuracy.
Successful approaches used voting and rich, possibly weighted or selected, features. The highest-ranking systems in the English all-words task (2473 words) were
—SMUaw [Mihalcea 2002b]. This system achieved an outstanding 69% accuracy and was based on pattern learning from a few examples. The system has a preprocessing phase, which includes named entity recognition and collocation extraction. The examples used for pattern learning are collected from SemCor, WordNet deﬁnitions, and GenCor, the outcome of a Web-based bootstrapping algorithm for the construction of annotated corpora (cf. Section 3.8.2);
—Ave-Antwerp [Hoste et al. 2002]. This system uses memory-based learning to build word experts. Each word expert consists of multiple classiﬁers, each focusing on different information sources. The classiﬁers are then combined in a voting scheme. 10fold cross-validation is performed to optimize the parameters of the memory-based learning classiﬁers used by the team and to optimize the voting scheme. The method scored second in the task, with a 63.6% performance;
—LIA-Sinequa [Crestan et al. 2001]. This system uses binary decision trees trained on the examples of the training sets from both the lexical sample and the all-words task.

8.3. Senseval-3
The third edition of the Senseval competition [Mihalcea and Edmonds 2004] took place in Barcelona in 2004. It consisted of 14 tasks, and, overall, 160 systems from 55 teams participated in the tasks. These included lexical sample and all-words tasks for seven languages as well as new tasks such as gloss disambiguation, semantic role labeling, multilingual annotations, logic forms, and the acquisition of subcategorizations. Table VIII shows the performance of the highest-ranking systems participating in the lexical sample and all-words tasks.
Regarding the English lexical sample task (3944 test instances), WordNet 1.7.1 was adopted as a sense inventory for nouns and adjectives, and WordSmyth for verbs.13 Most of the systems were supervised. The performance of the best 14 systems ranged between 72.9% and 70.9%, suggesting that this task seems to have reached a ceiling which is difﬁcult to overcome. Moreover, during a panel at Senseval-3 it was agreed that this task is becoming less and less interesting as the disambiguation of a single target word in a sentence is not useful in most human language technology applications. Most

13http://www.wordsmyth.net.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:47

Table VIII. Performance of the Highest-Ranking Systems Participating in the Lexical Sample and

All-Words Tasks at Senseval-3 (When two ﬁgures are reported, they stand for precision/recall (see

Section 7.1). U/S stand for unsupervised and supervised, respectively. The baseline for the all-words

task achieves 60.9% or 62.4% depending on the treatment of multiwords and hyphenated words)

Lexical sample

All words

Accuracy

System

U/S

Accuracy

System

U/S

72.9

htsa3

S

65.1

GAMBL-AW

S

72.6

IRST-Kernels

S

65.1/64.2

SenseLearner

S

72.4

nusels

S

.

72.4

htsa4

S

..

.. . . ..

72.3

BCU comb

S

58.3/58.2

IRST-DDD-00

U

55.2

MFS BL

S

60.9-62.4

MFS BL

S

of the top systems used kernel methods (cf. Section 3.6). Other approaches include the voted combination of algorithms and the use of a rich set of features, comprising domain information and syntactic relations. We outline here the two top-ranking systems:
—Htsa3 [Grozea 2004]. This system obtained the best performance (72.9% accuracy) by applying the regularized least-squares classiﬁcation (RLSC), a technique based on kernels and Tikhonov regularization. The features used include collocations and lemmas around the target word. Htsa3 used a linear kernel: its weight values were normalized with the frequency of the senses in the training set. A normalization step is performed to deal with the implicit bias of RLSC which favours frequent senses. The regularization parameter and a further parameter for smooth normalization were estimated using the previous Senseval corpora.
—IRST-Kernels [Strapparava et al. 2004]. This system ranked second with 72.6% accuracy and is based on SVM (see Section 3.6). The kernel function combines heterogeneous sources of information and is the result of the combination of two different kernels, a paradigmatic and a syntagmatic kernel.
—The syntagmatic kernel determines the similarity of two contexts based on the number of word sequences they have in common. It is implemented in terms of two other kernels which take into account collocation information and part-of-speech sequences.
—The paradigmatic kernel exploits information about the domain of the input text and combines again two other kernels: a bag of words kernel and a latent semantic indexing kernel. The latter aims to relieve the problem of data sparseness of the former kernel.
The English all-words task [Snyder and Palmer 2004] saw the participation of 26 systems from 16 teams. The test set included 2037 sense-tagged words. The best system attained a 65.1% accuracy, whereas the ﬁrst sense baseline (cf. Section 7.2.2) achieved 60.9% or 62.4% depending on the treatment of multiwords and hyphenated words. In Table VIII we report the best two supervised systems together with the best unsupervised system (IRST-DDD):
—GAMBL-AW [Decadt et al. 2004]. GAMBL is a supervised method that learns word experts from extensive corpora. The training corpus includes SemCor, the previous Senseval corpora, usage examples in WordNet, etc. The features extracted from the resulting training set include a local context and contextual keywords. GAMBL is based on memory-based learning, with an additional optimization of features and parameters performed with genetic algorithms. The system classiﬁed ﬁrst in the allwords task with 65.1% accuracy.
—SenseLearner [Mihalcea and Faruque 2004]. SenseLearner classiﬁed second in the task, with 65.1% precision and 64.2% recall. This approach uses a small number of

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:48

R. Navigli

hand-tagged examples, and heavily relies on SemCor and the WordNet taxonomy. It performs two main steps:
—First, a semantic model for each part of speech is learned from SemCor based on cooccurrence features (memory-based learning is employed). Then, the model makes a prediction for each instance in the test set. This method leads to 85.6% coverage;
—Second, a semantic generalization step is applied with the aid of WordNet and the use of syntactic dependencies: during a training phase, all the dependency pairs in SemCor are acquired (e.g. (drinkv, watern)). Each pair is generalized with the hypernyms of the nouns and verbs involved, thus creating generalized feature vectors. During testing, for each dependency pair, and for all possible combinations of senses, feature vectors are created. Memory-based learning is applied to each vector, thus obtaining a positive or negative value for each of them. Finally, a sense choice is made based on these values.
—IRST-DDD [Strapparava et al. 2004]. The approach basically compares the domain of the context surrounding the target word w with the domains of each sense of w (cf. Section 6.2) and uses a version of WordNet augmented with domain labels (e.g., ECONOMY, GEOGRAPHY, etc.; cf. Section 2.2.1).

8.4. Semeval-2007
The fourth edition of Senseval, held in 2007, has been renamed Semeval-2007 [Agirre et al. 2007b], given the presence of tasks of semantic analysis not necessarily related to word sense disambiguation. Some of the tasks proposed for Semeval-2007 dealt with the observations and conclusions drawn during the discussion and panels in the Senseval-3 workshop. Among the 18 tasks organized, those related to WSD can be classiﬁed as follows:
—explicit WSD tasks, that is, tasks requiring an explicit assignment of word senses to target words. These include
—lexical sample and all-words coarse-grained WSD tasks (discussed below), aiming at understanding the impact of sense granularity on WSD accuracy;
—a preposition disambiguation task [Litkowski and Hargraves 2007];
—the evaluation of WSD on Cross-Language Information Retrieval [Agirre et al. 2007a], which constitutes an important effort towards in vivo evaluation;
—the resolution of metonymies [Markert and Nissim 2007], that is, the substitution of the attribute or feature of a thing for the thing itself (e.g., glass to express the content of a glass, rather than the container itself).
—implicit WSD tasks, that is, tasks where the system output implies some kind of implicit disambiguation. These include
—word sense induction and discrimination [Agirre and Soroa 2007], for a comparative assessment of unsupervised systems among themselves and with supervised and knowledge-based systems;
—a lexical substitution task [McCarthy and Navigli 2007], aiming at the objective evaluation of both supervised and unsupervised systems, and applicable in the future to the evaluation of knowledge resources.
The coarse-grained English lexical sample task [Pradhan et al. 2007] saw the participation of 13 systems. The test set contained 4851 tagged instances of 100 words. The best system attained an 88.70% accuracy, whereas the ﬁrst sense baseline achieved

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:49

Table IX. Performance of the Highest-Ranking Systems Participating in the

Coarse-Grained Lexical Sample and All-Words Tasks at Semeval (When two

ﬁgures are reported, they stand for precision/recall (see Section 7.1). U/S

stand for unsupervised and supervised, respectively.)

Coarse-grained Lexical sample

Coarse-grained All words

Accuracy

System

U/S Accuracy

System

U/S

88.7

NUS-ML

S

86.9

UBC-ALM

S

86.4

I2R

S

85.4

USP-IBM2

S

85.1

USP-IBM1

S

82.5

NUS-PT

S

81.6

NUS-ML

S

.. . . . . . ..

70.2

TKB-UO

U

78.0

MFS BL

S

78.9

MFS BL

S

78%. In Table IX we report the best-performing systems. We brieﬂy outline the best three systems here:
—NUS-ML [Cai et al. 2007]. This approach is based on a supervised algorithm called Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), a probabilistic model which can be represented as a three-level hierarchical Bayesian model [Blei et al. 2003]. Lexical, syntactic, and topic features are employed to represent target instances.
—UBC-ALM [Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle 2007]. This system combines several knearest neighbor classiﬁers (cf. Section 3.5), each adopting a distinct set of features: local, topical, and latent features, the latter learned from a reduced space using singular value decomposition (cf. Section 4.1).
—I2R [Niu et al. 2007]. This system is based on the label propagation algorithm, where label information of any vertex in a graph is propagated to nearby vertices through weighted edges until convergence.
Concerning the all-words task, both a ﬁne-grained [Pradhan et al. 2007] and a coarsegrained [Navigli et al. 2007] disambiguation exercise were organized. In the former, (465 tagged words), state-of-the-art performance of 59.1% [Tratz et al. 2007] and 58.7% [Chan et al. 2007b] accuracy were obtained (compared to 51.4% ﬁrst sense baseline). The coarse-grained English all-words task (2269 sense-tagged words) saw the participation of 14 systems from 12 teams. The best participating system attained an 82.50% accuracy. The SSI system (cf. Section 5.3.2), participating out of competition, reached an accuracy of 83.21% (with the highest performance on a domain text, which penalized most supervised systems). The ﬁrst sense baseline achieved 78.89%. In Table IX we report the best two supervised participating systems together with the best unsupervised system (TKB-UO):
—NUS-PT [Chan et al. 2007b]. This system participated both in the coarse-grained and ﬁne-grained English all-words tasks. It is based on SVM, using traditional lexicosyntactic features. Training examples were gathered from parallel corpora, SemCor and DSO.
—NUS-ML [Cai et al. 2007]. This is the same system described above for lexical sample WSD.
—TKB-UO [Anaya-Sa´ nchez et al. 2007]. This system performs an iterative disambiguation process consisting of two steps: a clustering of senses of the context words, and a ﬁltering step which identiﬁes the clusters which best match the context and selects the senses of previously uncovered words.
The interested reader can refer to Agirre et al. [2007b] for a description of the 18 tasks and the systems participating in the Semeval-2007 competition. In the next section we comment on the four competitions.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:50

R. Navigli

8.5. Remarks on the Senseval/Semeval Competitions
Admittedly, it is very difﬁcult to compare the performance of state-of-the-art systems across the four evaluation campaigns for several reasons. First, different dictionaries have been adopted (HECTOR in Senseval-1, WordNet 1.7 in Senseval-2, WordNet 1.7.1 in Senseval-3, WordNet 2.1 and coarse-grained inventories in Semeval-2007): the adoption of WordNet caused a substantial drop in performance (from 78% to 64% accuracy in the lexical sample task from Senseval-1 to Senseval-2). Second, it is hard to extrapolate the contribution of single techniques in most systems, as they usually combine different approaches. Third, supervised systems are trained on different corpora, and knowledge-based systems exploit different resources. Finally, Semeval-2007 shifted the focus toward coarse-grained WSD. However, we want to comment on the following points:
—the performance variations are quite consistent with the baseline changes across the competitions: for the lexical sample task, there is a general decrease in performance between Senseval-1 and -2 and a general increase between Senseval-2 and -3 for both supervised and unsupervised systems; for the all-words task, with the exception of SMUaw (which did not participate in Senseval-3), there is a general increase in performance from Senseval-2 to Senseval-3; however, we note that for the lexical sample task the best systems increase of +21 (Senseval-1), +16.6 (Senseval-2), +17.7 points (Senseval-3), over the ﬁrst sense baseline, while for the ﬁne-grained all-words task, the difference changes from +12 (Senseval-2) to just +3 (Senseval-3), and +7.7 (Semeval-2007);
—performance in the lexical sample task seems to have reached a plateau around 73% accuracy when a ﬁne-grained lexicon such as WordNet was adopted: this is a clear clue that supervised systems, speciﬁcally trained on a set of words, cannot exceed that performance within this setting;
—performance in the ﬁne-grained all-words task can be established between 65% and 70% when WordNet is adopted, whereas better results, between 78% and 81%, have been reported in the literature when coarse-grained senses are used (see, e.g., Kohomban and Lee [2005]; Navigli [2006c]); the latter results are also conﬁrmed by the state-of-the-art performance of 82–83% accuracy obtained in the Semeval-2007 coarse-grained all-words task; potentially, these ﬁgures might be even improved given the fact that to date most supervised systems have not been retrained on a full-ﬂedged coarse-grained sense inventory;
—among supervised methods, memory-based learning and SVM approaches proved to be among the best systems in several competitions: systems based on the former ranked third in Senseval-1 lexical sample [Veenstra et al. 2000], second in both the Senseval-2 lexical sample and all-words tasks [Mihalcea 2002b; Hoste et al. 2002], ﬁrst and second in Senseval-3 all-words [Decadt et al. 2004; Mihalcea and Faruque 2004], second in the Semeval-2007 lexical sample [Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle 2007]; SVM approaches to WSD also proved to perform best, when applied both in the lexical sample [Grozea 2004; Strapparava et al. 2004] and all-words exercises [Chan et al. 2007b]; these supervised methods deﬁnitely proved superior to other approaches;
—the ﬁrst sense baseline is a real challenge for all-words WSD systems: only few systems are able to exceed it; this fact does not recur in lexical sample WSD, as usually more training data is available and the task is less likely to reﬂect the real distribution of word meanings within texts (e.g., consider the extreme case of an equally balanced frequency of the meanings of a word: the ﬁrst sense baseline would perform with accuracy equal to the random baseline); the fact that most methods ﬁnd it

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:51

difﬁcult to overcome the ﬁrst sense baseline is an indicator that most of the efforts seem to be of little use; in this respect, knowledge-based methods, and speciﬁcally structural approaches, which achieve performance close or equal to the ﬁrst sense baseline, have the advantage of providing justiﬁcations for their sense choices in terms of semantic graphs, patterns, lexical chains, etc; as a result, and in contrast to the output of the baseline and most supervised systems, the output of these methods can be exploited to (graphically) support humans in tasks such as the semantic annotation and validation of texts [Navigli 2006a, 2008], semiautomatic acquisition of knowledge resources, lexicography, and so on;
—the organization of coarse-grained tasks at Semeval-2007 allowed for the assessment of state-of-the-art systems on sense inventories with a lower granularity than WordNet; as a result, the performance obtained was much higher: 88.7% in the lexical sample, and 82–83% accuracy in the all-words task; this is very good news for the ﬁeld of WSD, thus showing that the problem of word sense representation is a relevant one to obtain performance in the 80%–90% accuracy range and, at the same time, maintain meaningful distinctions between word senses;
—ﬁnally, the organization of other evaluation exercises, like those introduced in Section 8.4, can potentially open new research directions in the ﬁeld of WSD, such as the objective assessment of unsupervised systems (also in comparison with their supervised and knowledge-based alternatives), the development of frameworks for end-to-end evaluation, etc.

9. APPLICATIONS
Unfortunately, to date explicit WSD has not yet demonstrated real beneﬁts in human language technology applications. Nevertheless, the lack of end-to-end applications is a consequence of the current performance of WSD, and will not prevent more accurate disambiguation systems (or even oracles, for theoretical assessments) to possibly semantically enable NLP applications in the future. We note that a higher accuracy may not only derive from innovative methods, but also from different settings for the disambiguation task (e.g., sense granularity, evaluation setting, disambiguation coverage, etc.).
Here we summarize a number of real-world applications which might beneﬁt from WSD and on which experiments have been (and are being) conducted (see Ide and Ve´ronis [1998] and Resnik [2006] for a thorough account).

9.1. Information Retrieval (IR)
State-of-the-art search engines do not use explicit semantics to prune out documents which are not relevant to a user query. An accurate disambiguation of the document base, together with a possible disambiguation of the query words, would allow it to eliminate documents containing the same words used with different meanings (thus increasing precision) and to retrieve documents expressing the same meaning with different wordings (thus increasing recall).
Most of the early work on the contribution of WSD to IR resulted in no performance improvement (e.g. Salton [1968]; Salton and McGill [1983]; Krovetz and Croft [1992]; Voorhees [1993]). Krovetz and Croft [1992] and Sanderson [2000] showed that only a small percentage of query words are not used in their most frequent (or predominant) sense (cf. Section 7.2.2), indicating that WSD must be very precise on uncommon items, rather than on frequent words. Sanderson [1994] concluded that, in the presence of queries with a large number of words, WSD cannot beneﬁt IR. He also pointed out that very short queries can be potentially very ambiguous. The experiments were conducted

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:52

R. Navigli

with the aid of pseudowords [Schu¨ tze 1992; Yarowsky 1993], that is, artiﬁcial words created by replacing in the test collection the occurrences of two or more words (e.g., the occurrences of pizza and window are substituted with the pseudoword pizza/window). As a result, lexical ambiguity is introduced and the IR performance can be assessed at various levels of WSD accuracy. Sanderson [1994] indicated that improvements in IR performance would be observed only if WSD could be performed with at least 90% accuracy. However, as discussed in Schu¨ tze and Pedersen [1995], the general validity of this result is debated, due to arguable experimental settings.
Clear, encouraging evidence of the usefulness of WSD in IR has come from Schu¨ tze and Pedersen [1995] and Stokoe et al. [2003] (the latter provided a broad overview of past research in this ﬁeld). Assuming a WSD accuracy greater than 90%, Schu¨ tze and Pedersen [1995] showed that the use of WSD in IR improves the precision by about 4.3% (from 29.9% to 34.2%). With lower WSD accuracy (62.1%), Stokoe et al. [2003] showed that a small improvement (1.73% on average) can still be obtained.

9.2. Information Extraction (IE)
In speciﬁc domains it is interesting to distinguish between speciﬁc instances of concepts: for example, in the medical domain we might be interested in identifying all kinds of drugs across a text, whereas in bioinformatics we would like to solve the ambiguities in naming genes and proteins. Tasks like named-entity recognition (NER), acronym expansion (e.g., MP as member of parliament or military police), etc., can all be cast as disambiguation problems, although this is still a relatively new area (e.g., Dill et al. [2003]).
Jacquemin et al. [2002] presented a dictionary-based method which consists of the application of disambiguation rules at the lexical, domain, and syntactic and semantic level. Malin et al. [2005] proposed the application of a link analysis method based on random walks to solve the ambiguity of named entities. Hassan et al. [2006] used a link analysis algorithm in a semisupervised fashion to weigh entity extraction patterns based on their impact on a set of instances. Finally, Ciaramita and Altun [2006] proposed the use of a supersense tagger, which assigns a class selected from a restricted set of WordNet synsets to words of interest. The approach, based on sequence labeling with hidden Markov models, needs a training step.
Some tasks at Semeval-2007 more or less directly dealt with WSD for information extraction. Speciﬁcally, the metonymy task [Markert and Nissim 2007] required systems to associate the appropriate metonymy with target named entities. For instance, in the sentence the BMW slowed down, BMW is a car company, but here we refer to a speciﬁc car instance produced by BMW. Similarly, the Web People Search task [Artiles et al. 2007] required systems to disambiguate people names occurring in Web documents, that is, to determine the occurrence of speciﬁc instances of people within texts.

9.3. Machine Translation (MT)
The automatic identiﬁcation of the correct translation of a word in context, that is, machine translation (MT), is a very difﬁcult task. Word sense disambiguation has been historically conceived as the main task to be solved in order to enable machine translation, based on the intuitive idea that the disambiguation of texts should help translation systems choose better candidates. In fact, depending on the context, words can have completely different translations. For instance, the English word line can be translated in Italian as linea, riga, verso, ﬁlo, corda, etc. Unfortunately, WSD has been much harder than expected, as we know after years of comparative evaluations. As mentioned in Section 1.2, the initial failure of WSD during the 1960s led to an acute crisis of the

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:53

ﬁeld of MT. Nowadays, there is contrasting evidence that WSD can beneﬁt MT: for instance, Carpuat and Wu [2005] claimed that WSD cannot be integrated into present MT applications, while Dagan and Itai [1994] and Vickrey et al. [2005] show that the proper use of WSD leads to an increase in the translation performance.
More recently, Carpuat and Wu [2007] and Chan et al. [2007a] showed that word sense disambiguation can help improve machine translation. In these works, predeﬁned sense inventories were abandoned in favor of WSD models which allow it to select the most likely translation phrase. However, these results leave the research ﬁeld open to hypotheses on the contribution of classical WSD to the success of machine translation.

9.4. Content Analysis
The analysis of the general content of a text in terms of its ideas, themes, etc., can certainly beneﬁt from the application of sense disambiguation. For instance, the classiﬁcation of blogs has recently been gaining more and more interest within the Internet community: as blogs grow at an exponential pace, we need a simple yet effective way to classify them, determine their main topics, and identify relevant (possibly semantic) connections between blogs and even between single blog posts. A second related area of research is that of (semantic) social network analysis, which is becoming more and more active with the recent evolutions of the Web.
Although some works have been recently presented on the semantic analysis of content (e.g., on semantic blog analysis with the aid of structural WSD [Berendt and Navigli 2006], on the disambiguation of entities in social networks [Aleman-Meza et al. 2006], etc.), this is an open and stimulating research area.

9.5. Word Processing
Word processing is a relevant application of natural language processing, whose importance has been recognized for a long time [Church and Rau 1995]. Word sense disambiguation can aid in correcting the spelling of a word [Yarowsky 1994], for case change, or to determine when diacritics should be inserted (e.g., in Italian for changing da (= from) to da` (= gives), or Papa (= Pope) to papa` (= dad), based on semantic evidence in context about the correct spelling). Given the increasing interest in Arabic NLP, WSD might play an increasingly relevant role in the determination and correction of diacritics.

9.6. Lexicography
WSD and lexicography (i.e., the professional writing of dictionaries) can certainly beneﬁt from each other: WSD can help provide empirical sense groupings and statistically signiﬁcant indicators of context for new or existing senses. Moreover, WSD can help create semantic networks out of machine-readable dictionaries [Richardson et al. 1998]. On the other side, a lexicographer can provide better sense inventories and senseannotated corpora which can beneﬁt WSD (see, e.g., the HECTOR project [Atkins 1993] and the Sketch Engine [Kilgarriff et al. 2004]).

9.7. The Semantic Web
Finally, the semantic Web vision [Berners-Lee et al. 2001] can potentially beneﬁt from most of the above-mentioned applications, as it inherently needs domain-oriented and unrestricted sense disambiguation to deal with the semantics of (Web) documents, and enable interoperability between systems, ontologies, and users. WSD has been used in semantic Web-related research ﬁelds, like ontology learning, to build domain

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:54

R. Navigli

taxonomies [Navigli et al. 2003; Navigli and Velardi 2004; Cimiano 2006] and enrich large-scale semantic networks [Navigli and Velardi 2005; Pennacchiotti and Pantel 2006; Snow et al. 2006].

10. OPEN PROBLEMS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section we sum up the main open problems, partially discussed throughout the survey, and outline some future directions for the ﬁeld of WSD.
10.1. The Representation of Word Senses
The choice of how to represent word senses is a foundational problem of WSD that we introduced in Section 2.1. On the one hand, an enumerative lexicon seems the most viable approach for an objective assessment of WSD systems. On the other hand, unsupervised algorithms can be more easily evaluated in vivo, that is, in end-to-end applications. In this respect, tasks such as WSD evaluation in cross-lingual information retrieval and lexical substitution held at Semeval-2007 shed some light on the real necessity for discrete sense inventories.
As a consequence of the widespread adoption of the enumerative approach, the problem of how to divide senses immediately arises [Ide and Ve´ronis 1998]. Several researchers (e.g., Wilks and Slator [1989], Fellbaum et al. [2001], Palmer et al. [2004], Ide and Wilks [2006]) have remarked that the sense divisions in most dictionaries are often too ﬁne-grained for most NLP applications. As discussed throughout this survey, this especially holds for WordNet, which is widely adopted within the NLP community.
One of the objectives of establishing an adequate level of granularity is to exceed the ceiling of ∼70% accuracy of state-of-the-art ﬁne-grained disambiguation systems [Edmonds and Kilgarriff 2002]. While this is still an open problem and in spite of skeptical positions like Kilgarriff’s [1997], there are several past and ongoing efforts toward the identiﬁcation of different levels of granularity for speciﬁc application needs. Among these we cite works on sense clustering [Dolan 1994; Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle 2003; Chklovski and Mihalcea 2003; McCarthy 2006; Ide 2006; Navigli 2006c; Palmer et al. 2007], and word sense induction from text (see Section 4). An interesting feature of algorithms which are able to rank the strength of the relationship between senses of the same word is that the granularity of the sense inventory can be tuned for the speciﬁc application at hand (see, e.g., McCarthy [2006]).
The tasks of coarse-grained lexical sample and all-words WSD organized at Semeval2007 also aimed at attacking the granularity problem. The two tasks were based on the works by Hovy et al. [2006] and Navigli [2006c], respectively. Hovy et al. [2006]—in the context of the OntoNotes project—created coarse senses for the Omega Ontology [Philpot et al. 2005], starting with the WordNet sense inventory, and iteratively partitioning senses until an interannotator agreement of 90% was reached in the sense annotation task (see also Dufﬁeld et al. [2007]). In contrast, Navigli [2006c] created WordNet sense clusters via an automatic mapping to sense entries in the Oxford Dictionary of English, which encodes a hierarchy of word senses, thus distinguishing between homonyms, polysemous senses, and, possibly, microdistinctions.
A clear position on the granularity issue was taken by Ide and Wilks [2006], who suggested that the level of sense distinctions required by applications corresponds roughly to that of homonyms, with the exception of some etimologically related senses (i.e., polysemous distinctions) which are actually perceived as homonyms by humans (e.g., paper as material made of cellulose, and paper as a newspaper).
A further problem which concerns the representation of senses is their ever-changing nature: the adoption of an enumerative lexicon leads inevitably to the continuous

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:55

discovery of missing senses in the sense inventory. A sense might be missing due to a new usage, a new word, a usage in a specialized context that the lexicographers did not want to cover, or simply an omission.
Unsupervised systems such as those described in Section 4 can be employed in the detection of emerging senses from a corpus of documents. Mapping a sense inventory to a different dictionary can also help identify missing senses (e.g., Navigli [2006c]). Sense discovery techniques can help lexicographers in the difﬁcult task of covering the full range of meanings expressed by a word. As a result, WSD approaches can rely on wider-coverage sense inventories.

10.2. The Knowledge Acquisition Bottleneck
Virtually all WSD methods heavily rely on knowledge, either corpora or dictionaries. Therefore, the so-called knowledge acquisition bottleneck is undoubtedly one of the most important issues in WSD. We already discussed in previous sections a number of techniques for alleviating this problem: bootstrapping and active learning (Section 3.8.1), the automatic acquisition of training corpora (Section 3.8.2), the use of crosslingual information (Section 6.3), etc. We discuss here a further trend aiming at relieving the knowledge acquisition bottleneck: the automatic enrichment of knowledge resources, speciﬁcally of machine-readable dictionaries and computational lexicons.
Knowledge enrichment dates back to pioneering works by Amsler [1980] and Litkowski [1978] on the structure of dictionary deﬁnitions. Methods for extracting information from deﬁnitions were developed (e.g., Chodorow et al. [1985]; Rigau et al. [1998]). The intuitive approach to extracting taxonomic information is based on three steps: (i) deﬁnition parsing to obtain the genus (i.e., the concept hypernym); (ii) genus disambiguation; (iii) taxonomy construction. However, idiosyncrasies and inconsistencies have been identiﬁed that make the task harder than it appears [Ide and Ve´ronis 1993]. In recent years dating from the seminal article by Hearst [1992], a large body of work on the enrichment of knowledge resources has focused on the use of corpora for extracting collocations and relation triples of different kinds [Etzioni et al. 2004; Chklovski and Pantel 2004; Ravichandran and Hovy 2002; Girju et al. 2003], acquiring lists of concepts [Lin and Pantel 2002], inducing topically related words from the Web [Agirre et al. 2001], etc.
In order to enrich existing resources such as WordNet with new semantic relations, collocations and relation triples need to be disambiguated (ontologization of relations, e.g., transforming (carn, drivern) into (car1n, driver1n)). To this end, Pantel [2005] proposed a method for the creation of ontological cooccurrence vectors. Navigli [2005] and Pennacchiotti and Pantel [2006] presented methods for disambiguating relation triples. Harabagiu et al. [1999] (and subsequent works) also aimed at augmenting WordNet with morphological and semantic information, based on a set of structural heuristics. Supervised machine learning approaches have also been used for the disambiguation of relation triples [Girju et al. 2003], although they usually require a strong endeavor in the annotation of training sets.
Finally, we cite two manual efforts to relieve the knowledge acquisition bottleneck. One is a collaborative platform for knowledge acquisition, namely, the Open Mind Word Expert [Chklovski and Mihalcea 2002], where human volunteers on the Web are asked to sense annotate words in context. The approach relies on the agreement between (possibly unskilled) Web annotators. A wide agreement is exploited to determine the most likely sense assignment for a target word instance. A second effort, presently ongoing at Princeton, concerns the enrichment of WordNet with semantically annotated glosses and the semiautomatic addition of semantic relations based on concept evocation (e.g., egg-bacon, yell-voice, etc.) in the WordNetPlus project [Boyd-Graber et al. 2006].

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:56

R. Navigli

We strongly believe that recent, large-scale efforts in knowledge acquisition and enrichment will enable wide coverage, and more accurate WSD systems (see, e.g., Cuadros and Rigau [2006] and Navigli and Lapata [2007]).

10.3. Domain-Oriented WSD
The successful use of WSD in applications is one of the most important objectives of this research ﬁeld. Applications are often focused on a speciﬁc domain of interest. However, little attention has been paid to domain-oriented disambiguation, that is, WSD which focuses on a speciﬁc branch of knowledge. The main hypothesis is that the knowledge of a domain of interest can help disambiguate words in a domain-speciﬁc text. Works on the identiﬁcation of the predominant sense (cf. Section 6.1), as well as domain-driven disambiguation (cf. Section 6.2) and domain tuning, that is, the automated selection of senses which are most appropriate to a target domain [Basili et al. 1997; Cucchiarelli and Velardi 1998; Buitelaar and Sacaleanu 2001], go in this direction.
The importance of domain-based WSD is determined by the increasing demand for domain-oriented applications, for example, in the domains of biomedicine, computer science, tourism, and so on. Also, the semantic Web vision requires the ability to deal with domain-speciﬁc ontologies (cf. Section 9). Therefore, the ability to work in speciﬁc ﬁelds of knowledge will be more and more critical for the success of semantic-aware domain-oriented applications.

11. CONCLUSIONS
In this article we surveyed the ﬁeld of word sense disambiguation. WSD is a hard task as it deals with the full complexities of language and aims at identifying a semantic structure from apparently unstructured sources of text. Research in the ﬁeld of WSD has been conducted since the early 1950s. A broad account of the history and literature in the ﬁeld can be found in Ide and Ve´ronis [1998] and Agirre and Edmonds [2006] (see also Hirst [1987] for a basic introduction to the issues involved in WSD and Manning and Schu¨ tze [1999] and Jurafsky and Martin [2000] for a review of WSD approaches).
The hardness of WSD strictly depends on the granularity of the sense distinctions taken into account. Yarowsky [1995] and Stevenson and Wilks [2001] showed that an accuracy above or around 95% can be attained in the disambiguation of homonyms. The problem gets much harder when it comes to a more general notion of polysemy, where sense granularity makes the difference both in the performance of disambiguation systems and in the agreement between human annotators.
Supervised methods undoubtedly perform better than other approaches. However, relying on the availability of large training corpora for different domains, languages, and tasks is not a realistic assumption. Ng [1997] estimated that, to obtain a high-accuracy wide-coverage disambiguation system, we probably need a corpus of about 3.2 million sense-tagged words. The human effort for constructing such a training corpus can be estimated to be 27 person-years, at a throughput of one word per minute [Edmonds 2000]. It might well be that, with such a resource at hand, supervised systems would perform with a signiﬁcantly higher accuracy than the current state of the art. However, this is just a hypothesis.
On the other hand, knowledge-based approaches seem to be most promising in the short-medium term for several reasons: ﬁrst, it has been shown that the more (especially structured) knowledge is available, the better the performance [Cuadros and Rigau 2006; Navigli and Lapata 2007]; second, the resources they rely on are increasingly enriched (for instance, consider the evolution over time of WordNet and other wordnets, and the future release of WordNetPlus; cf. Section 10.2); third,

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:57

applications in the semantic Web need knowledge-rich methods which can exploit the potential of domain ontologies and enable semantic interoperability between users, enterprises, and systems.
We are not arguing against supervised approaches in general. Consider, for example, the importance they have for part-of-speech tagging, where supervision is critical to achieve very high performance. It is interesting to note that, while part-of-speech tagging requires words to be labeled with a ﬁxed set of predeﬁned tags, in WSD sense tags vary for each word. As a result, WSD supervised systems require vast amounts of annotated data which are not usually available for all the words of interest (thus leading to the phenomenon of data sparseness). This is why in all-words settings, supervised approaches are often integrated with ﬁrst sense or knowledge-based back-off strategies, which are used in lack of training instances. However, it must be noted that virtually all systems recur to these strategies, including knowledge-based ones, as often the knowledge encoded in lexical resources is not sufﬁcient to constrain the senses of all words in context.
There is a general agreement that WSD needs to show its relevance in vivo, that is, in applications such as information retrieval or machine translation. On the one hand, the community must not discontinue in vitro (i.e., stand-alone) evaluations of WSD, as there are still unclear points to be settled. On the other hand, full-ﬂedged applications should be built including WSD either as an integrated or a pluggable component. Some of the tasks in the Semeval competition went in this direction. Also, theoretical experiments could be performed to determine more precisely which minimum WSD performance (90%, 95%, 100% accuracy?) is needed to enable which application.
Although some contrasting works have been published on the topic, no conclusive result has been reported in favor or against the use of sense inventories and their granularity in applications. Unsupervised approaches might prove successful, showing that we do not need to rely on predeﬁned lists of senses. However, it might be as well that the use of sense inventories with a certain granularity (not too ﬁne-grained nor trivially coarse) allow knowledge-rich and supervised methods to provide a decisive contribution.
The usefulness of all-words disambiguation in an applicative perspective is quite evident. Nonetheless, we think that disambiguating all content words sometimes proves to be an academic exercise. For instance, almost 8% of the Senseval-3 all-words test set is composed of word tokens lemmatized as bev. We doubt that in Information Retrieval applications such a common verb can have a strong inﬂuence in the success of user queries. Moreover, sentences such as Phil was like that, thanks anyhow or I’m just numb (again from the Senseval-3 all-words test set) do not convey enough meaning for being disambiguated at a ﬁne-grained level even by human annotators (more context does not necessarily help). Including these sentences in the in vitro assessment of WSD systems needlessly lowers their performance and does not provide additional insights into the beneﬁts for end-to-end applications. We note that several systems, both supervised or knowledge-based, can perform with high precision (sometimes beyond 90%) and low recall, even when ﬁne-grained sense distinctions are adopted. This setting might also prove useful to foster a WSD vision of the semantic Web: the availability of systems able to disambiguate textual resources on the Web would certainly enable some degree of semantic interoperability. Again, it might not be necessary to disambiguate all the words in a Web page, but rather a substantial subset of them, that is, those conveying the real content of the resource. Words might be disambiguated with respect to computational lexicons and domain ontologies, depending on the meaning they can convey. We believe that performance tuning (“disambiguate less, disambiguate better”) should be further investigated in the future in applicative settings and in comparative tasks during the evaluation campaigns to come.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:58

R. Navigli

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is dedicated to the memory of Sandro Bichara. The author wishes to thank Francesco Maria Tucci for his invaluable support, Paola Velardi for her encouragement and advice, Ed Hovy for his useful remarks on an early version of this work, and Diana McCarthy and the four anonymous reviewers for their useful comments.
REFERENCES
ABNEY, S. 2004. Understanding the Yarowsky algorithm. Computat. Ling. 30, 3, 365–395.
ABNEY, S. AND LIGHT, M. 1999. Hiding a semantic class hierarchy in a Markov model. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Unsupervised Learning in Natural Language Processing (College Park, MD). 1–8.
AGIRRE, E., ANSA, O., MARTINEZ, D., AND HOVY, E. 2001. Enriching WordNet concepts with topic signatures. In Proceedings of the NAACL Workshop on WordNet and Other lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and Customizations (Pittsburg, PA). 23–28.
AGIRRE, E. AND EDMONDS, P., Eds. 2006. Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications. Springer, New York, NY.
AGIRRE, E. AND LOPEZ DE LACALLE, O. 2003. Clustering WordNet word senses. In Proceedings of the Conference on Recent Advances on Natural Language Processing (RANLP, Borovets, Bulgaria). 121–130.
AGIRRE, E. AND LOPEZ DE LACALLE, O. 2007. UBC-ALM: Combining k-nn with SVD for WSD. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 342–345.
AGIRRE, E., MAGNINI, B., DE LACALLE, O., OTEGI, A., RIGAU, G., AND VOSSEN, P. 2007a. Semeval-2007 task 01: Evaluating WSD on cross-language information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 1–6.
AGIRRE, E., MA`RQUEZ, L., AND WICENTOWSKI, R., Eds. 2007b. Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval). Association for Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic.
AGIRRE, E. AND MARTINEZ, D. 2000. Exploring automatic word sense disambiguation with decision lists and the web. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Saarbru¨ cken, Germany). 11–19.
AGIRRE, E. AND MARTINEZ, D. 2001. Learning class-to-class selectional preferences. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL, Toulouse, France). 15–22.
AGIRRE, E., MART´ıNEZ, D., LOPEZ DE LACALLE, O., AND SOROA, A. 2006. Two graph-based algorithms for state-ofthe-art wsd. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (Sydney, Australia). 585–593.
AGIRRE, E. AND RIGAU, G. 1996. Word sense disambiguation using conceptual density. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Copenhagen, Denmark). 16–22.
AGIRRE, E. AND SOROA, A. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 02: Evaluating word sense induction and discrimination systems. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 7–12.
AGIRRE, E. AND STEVENSON, M. 2006. Knowledge sources for WSD. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 217–251.
ALEMAN-MEZA, B., NAGARAJAN, M., RAMAKRISHNAN, C., DING, L., KOLARI, P., SHETH, A., ARPINAR, I., JOSHI, A., AND FININ, T. 2006. Semantic analytics on social networks: Experiences in addressing the problem of conﬂict of interest detection. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW, Edinburgh, Scotland, U.K.). 407–416.
ALPAYDIN, E. 2004. Introduction to Machine Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
AMSLER, R. A. 1980. The structure of the Merriam-Webster pocket dictionary. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.
ANAYA-SA´NCHEZ, H., PONS-PORRATA, A., AND BERLANGA-LLAVORI, R. 2007. TKB-UO: Using sense clustering for wsd. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 322–325.
ARTILES, J., GONZALO, J., AND SEKINE, S. 2007. The Semeval-2007 WEPS evaluation: Establishing a benchmark for the Web people search task. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 64–69.
ATKINS, S. 1993. Tools for computer-aided corpus lexicography: The Hector project. Acta Linguistica Hungarica 41, 5–72.
BANERJEE, S. AND PEDERSEN, T. 2003. Extended gloss overlaps as a measure of semantic relatedness. In Proceedings of the 18th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI, Acapulco, Mexico). 805–810.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:59

BAR-HILLEL, Y. 1960. The present status of automatic translation of languages. Advan. Comput. 1, 91–163.
BARZILAY, R. AND ELHADAD, M. 1997. Using lexical chains for text summarization. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization (Madrid, Spain). 10–17.
BASILI, R., ROCCA, M. D., AND PAZIENZA, M. T. 1997. Contextual word sense tuning and disambiguation. Appl. Artiﬁc. Intell. 11, 3, 235–262.
BENTIVOGLI, L. AND PIANTA, E. 2005. Exploiting parallel texts in the creation of multilingual semantically annotated resources: The MultiSemCor Corpus. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 11, 3, 247–261.
BERENDT, B. AND NAVIGLI, R. 2006. Finding your way through blogspace: Using semantics for cross-domain blog analysis. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium 2006 (AAAIS) on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (CAAW, Palo Alto, CA). 1–8.
BERNARD, J. R. L., Ed. 1986. Macquarie Thesaurus. Macquarie, Sydney, Australia.
BERNERS-LEE, T., HENDLER, J., AND LASSILA. O. 2001. The semantic Web. http://www.sciam.com/article. cfm?id=the-semantic-web&page=2.
BLACK, E. 1988. An experiment in computational discrimination of English word senses. IBM J. Res. Devel. 32, 2, 185–194.
BLEI, D. M., NG, A. Y., AND JORDAN, M. I. 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3, 993–1022.
BORDAG, S. 2006. Word sense induction: Triplet-based clustering and automatic evaluation. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL, Trento, Italy). 137–144.
BOSER, B. E., GUYON, I. M., AND VAPNIK, V. N. 1992. A training algorithm for optimal margin classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory (Pittsburgh, PA). 144–152.
BOYD-GRABER, J., FELLBAUM, C., OSHERSON, D., , AND SCHAPIRE, R. 2006. Adding dense, weighted connections to WordNet. In Proceedings of the 3rd International WordNet Conference (Jeju Island, Korea).
BRANTS, T. AND FRANZ, A. 2006. Web 1t 5-gram, ver. 1, ldc2006t13. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA.
BRIN, S. AND PAGE, M. 1998. Anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on World Wide Web (Brisbane, Australia). 107–117.
BRODY, S., NAVIGLI, R., AND LAPATA, M. 2006. Ensemble methods for unsupervised WSD. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics joint with the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL, Sydney, Australia). 97–104.
BROWN, P. F., PIETRA, S. A. D., PIETRA, V. J. D., AND MERCER, R. L. 1991. Word-sense disambiguation using statistical methods. In Proceedings of 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Berkeley, CA). 264–270.
BRUCE, R. AND WIEBE, J. 1994. Word-sense disambiguation using decomposable models. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL, Las Cruces, NM). 139–145.
BRUCE, R. AND WIEBE, J. 1999. Decomposable modeling in natural language processing. Comput. Ling. 25, 2, 195–207.
BUDANITSKY, A. AND HIRST, G. 2006. Evaluating WordNet-based measures of semantic distance. Computat. Ling. 32, 1, 13–47.
BUITELAAR, P. 1998. Corelex: An ontology of systematic polysemous classes. In Formal Ontology in Information Systems, N. Guarino, Ed. IOS Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 221–235.
BUITELAAR, P., MAGNINI, B., STRAPPARAVA, C., AND VOSSEN, P. 2006. Domain-speciﬁc WSD. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 275–298.
BUITELAAR, P. AND SACALEANU, B. 2001. Ranking and selecting synsets by domain relevance. In Proceedings of the NAACL Workshop on WordNet and Other lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and Customizations (Pittsburgh, PA).
BUNKE, H. AND SANFELIU, A., Eds. 1990. Syntactic and Structural Pattern Recognition: Theory and Applications. Vol. 7. World Scientiﬁc Series in Computer Science, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
CAI, J. F., LEE, W. S., AND TEH, Y. W. 2007. NUS-ML: Improving word sense disambiguation using topic features. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 249–252.
CARDIE, C. AND MOONEY, R. J. 1999. Guest editors’ introduction: Machine learning and natural language. Mach. Learn. 34, 1–3, 5–9.
CARPUAT, M. AND WU, D. 2005. Word sense disambiguation vs. statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL, Ann Arbor, MI). 387–394.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:60

R. Navigli

CARPUAT, M. AND WU, D. 2007. Improving statistical machine translation using word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL, Prague, Czech Republic). 61–72.
CHAN, Y. S. AND NG, H. T. 2005. Scaling up word sense disambiguation via parallel texts. In Proceedings of the 20th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI, Pittsburgh, PA). 1037–1042.
CHAN, Y. S., NG, H. T., AND CHIANG, D. 2007a. Word sense disambiguation improves statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (Prague, Czech Republic). 33–40.
CHAN, Y. S., NG, H. T., AND ZHONG, Z. 2007b. NUS-PT: Exploiting parallel texts for word sense disambiguation in the English all-words tasks. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 253–256.
CHARNIAK, E., BLAHETA, D., GE, N., HALL, K., HALE, J., AND JOHNSON, M. 2000. Bllip 1987-89 WSJ corpus release 1. Tech. rep. LDC2000T43. Linguistic Data Consortium (Philadelphia, PA).
CHKLOVSKI, T. AND MIHALCEA, R. 2002. Building a sense tagged corpus with Open Mind Word Expert. In Proceedings of ACL 2002 Workshop on WSD: Recent Successes and Future Directions (Philadelphia, PA).
CHKLOVSKI, T. AND MIHALCEA, R. 2003. Exploiting agreement and disagreement of human annotators for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Recent Advances on Natural Language Processing (RANLP, Borovets, Bulgaria).
CHKLOVSKI, T., MIHALCEA, R., PEDERSEN, T., AND PURANDARE, A. 2004. The Senseval-3 multilingual EnglishHindi lexical sample task. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain). 5–8.
CHKLOVSKI, T. AND PANTEL, P. 2004. Verbocean: Mining the Web for ﬁne-grained semantic verb relations. In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Barcelona, Spain).
CHODOROW, M., BYRD, R., AND HEIDORN, G. 1985. Extracting semantic hierarchies from a large on-line dictionary. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Chicago, IL). 299–304.
CHURCH, K. W. AND RAU, L. F. 1995. Commercial applications of natural language processing. Commun. ACM 38, 11, 71–79.
CIARAMITA, M. AND ALTUN, Y. 2006. Broad-coverage sense disambiguation and information extraction with a supersense sequence tagger. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Sydney, Australia). 594–602.
CIARAMITA, M. AND JOHNSON, M. 2000. Explaining away ambiguity: Learning verb selectional restrictions with Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Saarbru¨ cken, Germany). 187–193.
CIMIANO, P. 2006. Ontology Learning and Population from Text: Algorithms, Evaluation and Applications. Springer, New York, NY.
CLARK, S. AND WEIR, D. 2002. Class-based probability estimation using a semantic hierarchy. Computat. Ling. 28, 2, 187–206.
CLEAR, J. 1993. The British National Corpus. In The Digital Word: Text-Based Computing in the Humanities, P. Delany and G. P. Landow, Eds. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 163–187.
COHN, D., ATLAS, R., AND LADNER, R. 1994. Improving generalization with active learning. Mach. Learn. 15, 2, 201–221.
COHN, T. 2003. Performance metrics for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology Workshop (Melbourne, Australia). 49–56.
COLLINS, M. 2004. Parameter estimation for statistical parsing models: Theory and practice of distributionfree methods. In New Developments in Parsing Technology, H. Bunt, J. Carroll, and G. Satta, Eds. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 19–55.
COST, S. AND SALZBERG, S. 1993. A weighted nearest neighbor algorithm for learning with symbolic features. Mach. Learn. 10, 1, 57–78.
COTTRELL, G. W. 1989. A Connectionist Approach to Word Sense Disambiguation. Pitman, London, U.K.
CRESTAN, E., EL-BZE, M., AND LOUPY, C. D. 2001. Improving WSD with multi-level view of context monitored by similarity measure. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation Systems (Senseval-2, Toulouse, France). 67–70.
CRUSE, D. A. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
CUADROS, M. AND RIGAU, G. 2006. Quality assessment of large scale knowledge resources. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Sydney, Australia). 534–541.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:61

CUCCHIARELLI, A. AND VELARDI, P. 1998. Finding a domain-appropriate sense inventory for semantically tagging a corpus. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 4, 4, 325–344.
DAELEMANS, W., VAN DEN BOSCH, A., AND ZAVREL, J. 1999. Forgetting exceptions is harmful in language learning. Mach. Learn. 34, 1, 11–41.
DAGAN, I. AND ENGELSON, S. 1995. Selective sampling in natural language learning. In Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on New Approaches to Learning for Natural Language Processing (Montreal, P.Q., Canada). 41–48.
DAGAN, I. AND ITAI, A. 1994. Word sense disambiguation using a second language monolingual corpus. Computat. Ling. 20, 4, 563–596.
DECADT, B., HOSTE, V., DAELEMANS, W., AND VAN DEN BOSCH, A. 2004. GAMBL, genetic algorithm optimization of memory-based WSD. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain). 108–112.
DEMPSTER, A., LAIRD, N., AND RUBIN, D. 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 39, 1–38.
DIAB, M. 2003. Word sense disambiguation within a multilingual framework. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Maryland, College Park, College of Park, MD.
DILL, S., EIRON, N., GIBSON, D., GRUHL, D., GUHA, R., JHINGRAN, A., KANUNGO, T., RAJAGOPALAN, S., TOMKINS, A., TOMLINE, J. A., AND ZIEN, J. Y. 2003. Semtag and Seeker: Bootstrapping the semantic Web via automated semantic annotation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW, Budapest, Hungary). 178–186.
DOLAN, W. B. 1994. Word sense ambiguation: Clustering related senses. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING). Kyoto, Japan.
DOROW, B. AND WIDDOWS, D. 2003. Discovering corpus-speciﬁc word senses. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Budapest, Hungary). 79–82.
DUFFIELD, C. J., HWANG, J. D., BROWN, S. W., DLIGACH, D., VIEWEG, S. E., DAVIS, J., AND PALMER, M. 2007. Criteria for the manual grouping of verb senses. In Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop (Prague, Czech Republic).
EDMONDS, P. 2000. Designing a task for SENSEVAL-2. Tech. note. University of Brighton, Brighton. U.K.
EDMONDS, P. AND COTTON, S. 2001. Senseval-2: Overview. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation Systems (Senseval-2, Toulouse, France). 1–6.
EDMONDS, P. AND KILGARRIFF, A. 2002. Introduction to the special issue on evaluating word sense disambiguation systems. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 8, 4, 279–291.
ESCUDERO, G., MA`RQUEZ, L., AND RIGAU, G. 2000a. Boosting applied to word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Machine Learning (ECML, Barcelona, Spain). 129–141.
ESCUDERO, G., MA`RQUEZ, L., AND RIGAU, G. 2000b. Naive Bayes and exemplar-based approaches to word sense disambiguation revisited. In Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI, Berlin, Germany). 421–425.
ESCUDERO, G., MA`RQUEZ, L., AND RIGAU, G. 2000c. On the portability and tuning of supervised word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Very Large Corpora (EMNLP/VLC, Hong Kong, China). 172–180.
ETZIONI, O., CAFARELLA, M., DOWNEY, D., KOK, S., POPESCU, A.-M., SHAKED, T., SODERLAND, S., WELD, D. S., AND YATES, A. 2004. Web-scale information extraction in Knowitall. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW, New York, NY). 100–110.
FELLBAUM, C., Ed. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
FELLBAUM, C., PALMER, M., DANG, H. T., DELFS, L., AND WOLF, S. 2001. Manual and automatic semantic annotation with WordNet. In Proceedings of the NAACL Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and Customizations (Pittsburgh, PA). 3–10.
FLORIAN, R., CUCERZAN, S., SCHAFER, C., AND YAROWSKY, D. 2002. Combining classiﬁers for word sense disambiguation. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 8, 4, 1–14.
FREUND, Y. AND SCHAPIRE, R. 1999. A short introduction to boosting. J. Japanese Soci. Artiﬁc. Intell. 14, 771–780.
FU, K. 1982. Syntactic Pattern Recognition and Applications. Prentice-Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ.
FUJII, A., INUI, K., TOKUNAGA, T., AND TANAKA, H. 1998. Selective sampling for example-based word sense disambiguation. Computat. Ling. 24, 4, 573–598.
GALE, W. A., CHURCH, K., AND YAROWSKY, D. 1992a. Estimating upper and lower bounds on the performance of word-sense disambiguation programs. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Newark, NJ). 249–256.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:62

R. Navigli

GALE, W. A., CHURCH, K., AND YAROWSKY, D. 1992b. A method for disambiguating word senses in a corpus. Comput. Human. 26, 415–439.
GALE, W. A., CHURCH, K., AND YAROWSKY, D. 1992c. One sense per discourse. In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop (Harriman, NY). 233–237.
GALE, W. A., CHURCH, K., AND YAROWSKY, D. 1992d. Using bilingual materials to develop word sense disambiguation methods. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation (Montreal, P.Q., Canada). 101–112.
GALLEY, M. AND MCKEOWN, K. 2003. Improving word sense disambiguation in lexical chaining. In Proceedings of the 18th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI, Acapulco, Mexico). 1486–1488.
GIRJU, R., BADULESCU, A., AND MOLDOVAN, D. 2003. Learning semantic constraints for the automatic discovery of part-whole relations. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology (Edmonton, Alta., Canada). 1–8.
GLIOZZO, A., MAGNINI, B., AND STRAPPARAVA, C. 2004. Unsupervised domain relevance estimation for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Barcelona, Spain). 380–387.
GOLUB, G. H. AND VAN LOAN, C. F. 1989. Matrix Computations. The John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
GRAFF, D. 2003. English gigaword. Tech. rep. LDC2003T05. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA.
GROZEA, C. 2004. Finding optimal parameter settings for high performance word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain). 125–128.
GRUBER, T. R. 1993. Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Formal Ontology (Padova, Italy).
HALLIDAY, M. A. AND HASAN, R., Eds. 1976. Cohesion in English. Longman Group Ltd, London, U.K.
HARABAGIU, S., MILLER, G., AND MOLDOVAN, D. 1999. WordNet 2—a morphologically and semantically enhanced resource. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop: Standardizing Lexical Resources. 1–8.
HASSAN, H., HASSAN, A., AND NOEMAN, S. 2006. Graph based semi-supervised approach for information extraction. In Proceedings of the TextGraphs Workshop in the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL, New York, NY). 9–16.
HAWKINS, P. AND NETTLETON, D. 2000. Large scale WSD using learning applied to senseval. Comput. Human. 34, 1-2, 135–140.
HEARST, M. 1991. Noun homograph disambiguation using local context in large text corpora. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference of the UW Centre for the New OED and Text Research: Using Corpora (Oxford, U.K). 1–19.
HEARST, M. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Nantes, France). 539–545.
HINDLE, D. AND ROOTH, M. 1993. Structural ambiguity and lexical relations. Computat. Ling. 19, 1, 103–120.
HIRST, G., Ed. 1987. Semantic Interpretation and the Resolution of Ambiguity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
HIRST, G. AND ST-ONGE, D. 1998. Lexical chains as representations of context for the detection and correction of malapropisms. In WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database, C. Fellbaum, Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 305–332.
HOSTE, V., HENDRICKX, I., DAELEMANS, W., AND VAN DEN BOSCH, A. 2002. Parameter optimization for machine learning of word sense disambiguation. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 8, 4, 311–325.
HOVY, E., MARCUS, M., PALMER, M., RAMSHAW, L., AND WEISCHEDEL, R. 2006. Ontonotes: The 90% solution. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Comp. Volume (New York, NY). 57–60.
IDE, N. 2000. Cross-lingual sense determination: Can it work? Comput. Human. 34, 1–2, 223–234.
IDE, N. 2006. Making senses: Bootstrapping sense-tagged lists of semantically-related words. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text, A. Gelbukh, Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3878. Springer, Berlin, Germeny, 13–27.
IDE, N., ERJAVEC, T., AND TUFIS, D. 2001. Automatic sense tagging using parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the 6th Natural Language Processing Paciﬁc Rim Symposium (Tokyo, Japan). 83–89.
IDE, N., ERJAVEC, T., AND TUFIS, D. 2002. Sense discrimination with parallel corpora. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Word Sense Disambiguation: Recent Successes and Future Directions (Philadelphia, PA). 54–60.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:63

IDE, N. AND SUDERMAN, K. 2006. Integrating linguistic resources: The American National Corpus model. In Proceedings of the 5th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC, Genoa, Italy).
IDE, N. AND VE´RONIS, J. 1993. Extracting knowledge bases from machine-readable dictionaries: Have we wasted our time? In Proceedings of the Workshop on Knowledge Bases and Knowledge Structures (Tokyo, Japan). 257–266.
IDE, N. AND VE´RONIS, J. 1998. Word sense disambiguation: The state of the art. Computat. Ling. 24, 1, 1–40.
IDE, N. AND WILKS, Y. 2006. Making sense about sense. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 47–73.
JACQUEMIN, B., BRUN, C., AND ROUX, C. 2002. Enriching a text by semantic disambiguation for information extraction. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Using Semantics for Information Retrieval and Filtering in the 3rd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluations (LREC, Las Palmas, Spain).
JIANG, J. J. AND CONRATH, D. W. 1997. Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Research in Computational Linguistics (Taiwan, ROC).
JOACHIMS, T. 1998. Text categorization with support vector machines: Learning with many relevant features. In Proceedings of the 10th European Conference on Machine Learning (ECML, Heidelberg, Germany). 137–142.
JOHNSTON, M. AND BUSA, F. 1996. Qualia structure and the compositional interpretation of compounds. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Breadth and Depth of Semantic Lexicons (Santa Cruz, CA).
JURAFSKY, D. AND MARTIN, J. 2000. Speech and Language Processing. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
KELLY, E. AND STONE, P. 1975. Computer Recognition of English Word Senses. Vol. 3 of North Holland Linguistics Series. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
KEOK, L. Y. AND NG, H. T. 2002. An empirical evaluation of knowledge sources and learning algorithms for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Philadelphia, PA). 41–48.
KILGARRIFF, A. 1997. I don’t believe in word senses. Comput. Human. 31, 2, 91–113.
KILGARRIFF, A. 1998. Senseval: An exercise in evaluating word sense disambiguation programs. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC, Granada, Spain). 1255–1258.
KILGARRIFF, A. 2006. Word senses. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 29–46.
KILGARRIFF, A. AND GREFENSTETTE, G. 2003. Introduction to the special issue on the Web as corpus. Computat. Ling. 29, 3, 333–347.
KILGARRIFF, A. AND PALMER, M. 2000. Introduction to the special issue on Senseval. Comput. Human. 34, 1-2, 1–13.
KILGARRIFF, A. AND ROSENZWEIG, J. 2000. English Senseval: Report and results. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC, Athens, Greece).
KILGARRIFF, A., RYCHLY, P., SMRZ, P., AND TUGWELL, D. 2004. The Sketch Engine. In Proceedings of the 11th EURALEX International Congress (Lorient, France). 105–116.
KILGARRIFF, A. AND YALLOP, C. 2000. What’s in a thesaurus? In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC, Athens, Greece). 1371–1379.
KLEIN, D., TOUTANOVA, K., ILHAN, T. H., KAMVAR, S. D., AND MANNING, C. D. 2002. Combining heterogeneous classiﬁers for word-sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL workshop on Word Sense Disambiguation: Recent Successes and Future Directions (Philadelphia, PA). 74–80.
KOHOMBAN, U. S. AND LEE, W. S. 2005. Learning semantic classes for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Ann Arbor, MI). 34–41.
KROVETZ, R. AND CROFT, W. B. 1992. Lexical ambiguity and information retrieval. ACM Trans. Inform. Syst. 10, 2, 115–141.
KUCERA, H. AND FRANCIS, W. N. 1967. Computational Analysis of Present-Day American English. Brown University Press, Providence, RI.
KUDO, T. AND MATSUMOTO, Y. 2001. Chunking with support vector machines. In Proceedings of NAACL (Pittsburgh, PA). 137–142.
LAPATA, M. AND KELLER, F. 2007. An information retrieval approach to sense ranking. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL, Rochester, NY). 348–355.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:64

R. Navigli

LEACOCK, C. AND CHODOROW, M. 1998. Combining local context and WordNet similarity for word sense identiﬁcation. In WordNet: An electronic Lexical Database, C. Fellbaum, Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 265–283.
LEACOCK, C., CHODOROW, M., AND MILLER, G. 1998. Using corpus statistics and WordNet relations for sense identiﬁcation. Computat. Ling. 24, 1, 147–166.
LEACOCK, C., TOWELL, G., AND VOORHEES, E. 1993. Corpus-based statistical sense resolution. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology (Princeton, NJ). 260–265.
LEE, L. 1999. Measures of distributional similarity. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (College Park, MD). 25–32.
LESK, M. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation using machine readable dictionaries: How to tell a pine cone from an ice cream cone. In Proceedings of the 5th SIGDOC (New York, NY). 24–26.
LI, H. AND ABE, N. 1998. Generalizing case frames using a thesaurus and the MDL principle. Computat. Ling. 24, 2, 217–244.
LIN, D. 1998a. Automatic retrieval and clustering of similar words. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational linguistics (COLING, Montreal, P.Q., Canada). 768–774.
LIN, D. 1998b. An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML, Madison, WI). 296–304.
LIN, D. AND PANTEL, P. 2002. Discovering word senses from text. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (Edmonton, Alta., Canada). 613– 619.
LITKOWSKI, K. C. 1978. Models of the semantic structure of dictionaries. Amer. J. Computat. Ling. 81, 25–74.
LITKOWSKI, K. C. 2005. Computational lexicons and dictionaries. In Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2nd ed.), K. R. Brown, Ed. Elsevier Publishers, Oxford, U.K., 753–761.
LITKOWSKI, K. C. AND HARGRAVES, O. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 06: Word-sense disambiguation of prepositions. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 24–29.
LUGER, G. F. 2004. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem-Solving, 5th ed. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
MAGNINI, B. AND CAVAGLIA`, G. 2000. Integrating subject ﬁeld codes into WordNet. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC, Athens, Greece). 1413–1418.
MALIN, B., AIROLDI, E., AND CARLEY, K. M. 2005. A network analysis model for disambiguation of names in lists. Computat. Math. Organizat. Theo. 11, 2, 119–139.
MALLERY, J. C. 1988. Thinking about foreign policy: Finding an appropriate role for artiﬁcial intelligence computers. Ph.D. dissertation. MIT Political Science Department, Cambridge, MA.
MANNING, C. AND SCHU¨ TZE, H. 1999. Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
MARKERT, K. AND NISSIM, M. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 08: Metonymy resolution at Semeval-2007. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 36–41.
MA`RQUEZ, L., ESCUDERO, G., MART`INEZ, D., AND RIGAU, G. 2006. Supervised corpus-based methods for WSD. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 167–216.
MARTINEZ, D. 2004. Supervised word sense disambiguation: Facing current challenges, Ph.D. dissertation. University of the Basque Country, Spain.
MCCARTHY, D. 2006. Relating wordnet senses for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Making Sense of Sense (Trento, Italy). 17–24.
MCCARTHY, D. AND CARROLL, J. 2003. Disambiguating nouns, verbs and adjectives using automatically acquired selectional preferences. Computat. Ling. 29, 4, 639–654.
MCCARTHY, D., KOELING, R., WEEDS, J., AND CARROLL, J. 2004. Finding predominant senses in untagged text. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Barcelona, Spain). 280–287.
MCCARTHY, D., KOELING, R., WEEDS, J., AND CARROLL, J. 2007. Unsupervised acquisition of predominant word senses. Computat. Ling. 33, 4, 553–590.
MCCARTHY, D. AND NAVIGLI, R. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 48–53.
MCCRAY, A. T. AND NELSON, S. J. 1995. The representation of meaning in the UMLS. Meth. Inform. Med. 34, 193–201.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:65

MCCULLOCH, W. AND PITTS, W. 1943. A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 5, 115–133.
MIHALCEA, R. 2002a. Bootstrapping large sense tagged corpora. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluations (LREC, Las Palmas, Spain).
MIHALCEA, R. 2002b. Word sense disambiguation with pattern learning and automatic feature selection. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 8, 4, 348–358.
MIHALCEA, R. 2004. Co-training and self-training for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL, Boston, MA). 33–40.
MIHALCEA, R. 2006. Knowledge-based methods for WSD. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, 107–131.
MIHALCEA, R. AND EDMONDS, P., Eds. 2004. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain).
MIHALCEA, R. AND FARUQUE, E. 2004. Senselearner: Minimally supervised word sense disambiguation for all words in open text. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain). 155–158.
MIHALCEA, R. AND MOLDOVAN, D. 1999. An automatic method for generating sense tagged corpora. In Proceedings of the 16th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI, Orlando, FL). 461–466.
MIHALCEA, R., TARAU, P., AND FIGA, E. 2004. Pagerank on semantic networks, with application to word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Geneva, Switzerland). 1126–1132.
MILLER, G. A., BECKWITH, R., FELLBAUM, C. D., GROSS, D., AND MILLER, K. 1990. WordNet: An online lexical database. Int. J. Lexicograph. 3, 4, 235–244.
MILLER, G. A., LEACOCK, C., TENGI, R., AND BUNKER, R. T. 1993. A semantic concordance. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology. 303–308.
MITCHELL, T. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill, New York, NY .
MOHAMMAD, S. AND HIRST, G. 2006. Determining word sense dominance using a thesaurus. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on European chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL, Trento, Italy). 121–128.
MOONEY, R. J. 1996. Comparative experiments on disambiguating word senses: An illustration of the role of bias in machine learning. In Proceedings of the 1996 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 82–91.
MORRIS, J. AND HIRST, G. 1991. Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of text. Computat. Ling. 17, 1.
MURATA, M., UTIYAMA, M., UCHIMOTO, K., MA, Q., AND ISAHARA, H. 2001. Japanese word sense disambiguation using the simple Bayes and support vector machine methods. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation Systems (Senseval-2, Toulouse, France). 135–138.
NAVIGLI, R. 2005. Semi-automatic extension of large-scale linguistic knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the 18th Florida Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Society Conference (FLAIRS, Clearwater Beach, FL). 548–553.
NAVIGLI, R. 2006a. Consistent validation of manual and automatic sense annotations with the aid of semantic graphs. Computat. Ling. 32, 2, 273–281.
NAVIGLI, R. 2006b. Experiments on the validation of sense annotations assisted by lexical chains. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL, Trento, Italy). 129–136.
NAVIGLI, R. 2006c. Meaningful clustering of senses helps boost word sense disambiguation performance. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics joint with the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL, Sydney, Australia). 105– 112.
NAVIGLI, R. 2008. A structural approach to the automatic adjudication of word sense disagreements. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 14, 4, 547–573.
NAVIGLI, R. AND LAPATA, M. 2007. Graph connectivity measures for unsupervised word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI, Hyderabad, India). 1683–1688.
NAVIGLI, R., LITKOWSKI, K. C., AND HARGRAVES, O. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 07: Coarse-grained English allwords task. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 30–35.
NAVIGLI, R. AND VELARDI, P. 2004. Learning domain ontologies from document warehouses and dedicated Websites. Computat. Ling. 30, 2, 151–179.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:66

R. Navigli

NAVIGLI, R. AND VELARDI, P. 2005. Structural semantic interconnections: A knowledge-based approach to word sense disambiguation. IEEE Trans. Patt. Anal. Mach. Intell. 27, 7, 1075–1088.
NAVIGLI, R., VELARDI, P., AND GANGEMI, A. 2003. Ontology learning and its application to automated terminology translation. IEEE Intell. Syst. 18, 1, 22–31.
NG, H. T. AND LEE, H. B. 1996. Integrating multiple knowledge sources to disambiguate word senses: An examplar-based approach. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Santa Cruz, CA). 40–47.
NG, H. T., WANG, B., AND CHAN, Y. S. 2003. Exploiting parallel texts for word sense disambiguation: an empirical study. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Sapporo, Japan). 455–462.
NG, T. H. 1997. Getting serious about word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics: Why, What, and How? (Washington D.C.). 1–7.
NG, V. AND CARDIE, C. 2003. Weakly supervised natural language learning without redundant views. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL, Edmonton, Alta., Canada). 173–180.
NIU, C., LI, W., SRIHARI, R., AND LI, H. 2005. Word independent context pair classiﬁcation model for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL, Ann Arbor, MI).
NIU, Z.-Y., JI, D.-H., AND TAN, C.-L. 2007. I2r: Three systems for word sense discrimination, Chinese word sense disambiguation, and English word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 177–182.
PALMER, M., BABKO-MALAYA, O., AND DANG, H. T. 2004. Different sense granularities for different applications. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding Systems in HLT/NAACL (Boston, MA). 49–56.
PALMER, M., DANG, H., AND FELLBAUM, C. 2007. Making ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained sense distinctions, both manually and automatically. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 13, 2, 137–163.
PALMER, M., NG, H. T., AND DANG, H. T. 2006. Evaluation of WSD systems. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 75–106.
PANTEL, P. 2005. Inducing ontological co-occurrence vectors. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Ann Arbor, MI). 125–132.
PEASE, A., NILES, I., AND LI, J. 2002. The suggested upper merged ontology: A large ontology for the semantic Web and its applications. In Proceedings of the AAAI-2002 Workshop on Ontologies and the Semantic Web (Edmonton, Alta., Canada).
PEDERSEN, T. 1998. Learning probabilistic models of word sense disambiguation, Ph.D. dissertation. Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX.
PEDERSEN, T. 2006. Unsupervised corpus-based methods for WSD. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY, 133– 166.
PEDERSEN, T., BANERJEE, S., AND PATWARDHAN, S. 2005. Maximizing semantic relatedness to perform word sense disambiguation. Res. rep. UMSI 2005/25. University of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, Minneapolis, MN.
PEDERSEN, T. AND BRUCE, R. 1997. Distinguishing word senses in untagged text. In Proceedings of the 1997 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Providence, RI). 197– 207.
PEDERSEN, T., PATWARDHAN, S., AND MICHELIZZI, J. 2004. WordNet::Similarity—measuring the relatedness of concepts. In Proceedings of the 19th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI, San Jose, CA) 144–152.
PENNACCHIOTTI, M. AND PANTEL, P. 2006. Ontologizing semantic relations. In Proceedings of the 44th Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) Conference joint with the 21th Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Sydney, Australia). 793–800.
PHILPOT, A., HOVY, E., AND PANTEL, P. 2005. The Omega Ontology. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on Ontologies and Lexical Resources (OntoLex, Jeju Island, South Korea). 59–66.
PIANTA, E., BENTIVOGLI, L., AND GIRARDI, C. 2002. MultiWordNet: Developing an aligned multilingual database. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Global WordNet (Mysore, India) 21– 25.
PRADHAN, S., LOPER, E., DLIGACH, D., AND PALMER, M. 2007. Semeval-2007 task-17: English lexical sample, SRL and all words. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 87–92.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:67

PROCTOR, P., Ed. 1978. Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English. Longman Group, Harlow, U.K.
PURANDARE, A. AND PEDERSEN, T. 2004. Improving word sense discrimination with gloss augmented feature vectors. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Lexical Resources for the Web and Word Sense Disambiguation (Puebla, Mexico). 123–130.
PUSTEJOVSKY, J. 1991. The generative lexicon. Computat. Ling. 17, 4, 409–441.
PUSTEJOVSKY, J. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
QUINLAN, J. R. 1986. Induction of decision trees. Mach. Learn. 1, 1, 81–106.
QUINLAN, J. R. 1993. Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
RADA, R., MILI, H., BICKNELL, E., AND BLETTNER, M. 1989. Development and application of a metric on semantic nets. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybernet. 19, 1, 17–30.
RAVICHANDRAN, D. AND HOVY, E. 2002. Learning surface text patterns for a question answering system. In Proceedings of 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Philadelphia, PA). 41–47.
RESNIK, P. 1995. Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI, Montreal, P.Q., Canada). 448–453.
RESNIK, P. 1997. Selectional preference and sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics: Why, What, and How? (Washington, D.C.). 52–57.
RESNIK, P. 2006. Word sense disambiguation in NLP applications. In Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, E. Agirre and P. Edmonds, Eds. Springer, New York, NY.
RESNIK, P. AND SMITH, N. A. 2003. The Web as a parallel corpus. Computat. Ling. 29, 3, 349–380.
RESNIK, P. AND YAROWSKY, D. 1997. A perspective on word sense disambiguation methods and their evaluation. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics: Why, What, and How? (Washington, D.C.). 79–86.
RESNIK, P. AND YAROWSKY, D. 1999. Distinguishing systems and distinguishing senses: new evaluation methods for word sense disambiguation. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 5, 2, 113–133.
RESNIK, P. S., Ed. 1993. Selection and information: A class-based approach to lexical relationships, Ph.D. dissertation. University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
RICHARDSON, S. D., DOLAN, W. B., AND VANDERWENDE, L. 1998. Mindnet: Acquiring and structuring semantic information from text. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Montreal, P.Q., Canada). 1098–1102.
RIGAU, G., RODRIGUEZ, H., AND AGIRRE, E. 1998. Building accurate semantic taxonomies from monolingual MRDs. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Montreal, P.Q., Canada). 1103–1109.
RIVEST, R. L. 1987. Learning decision lists. Mach. Learn. 2, 3, 229–246.
ROGET, P. M. 1911. Roget’s International Thesaurus, 1st ed. Cromwell, New York, NY.
RUSSELL, S. AND NORVIG, P. 2002. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 2nd ed. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
SALTON, G. 1968. Automatic Information Organization and Retrieval. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
SALTON, G. AND MCGILL, M. 1983. Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
SANDERSON, M. 1994. Word sense disambiguation and information retrieval. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR, Dublin, Ireland). 142–151.
SANDERSON, M. 2000. Retrieving with good sense. Inform. Retriev. 2, 1, 49–69.
SAVOVA, G., PEDERSEN, T., PURANDARE, A., AND KULKARNI, A. 2005. Resolving ambiguities in biomedical text with unsupervised clustering approaches. Res. rep. UMSI 2005/80. University of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, Minneapolis, MN.
SCHAPIRE, R. E. AND SINGER, Y. 1999. Improved boosting algorithms using conﬁdence-rated predictions. Mach. Learn. 37, 3, 297–336.
SCHU¨ TZE, H. 1992. Dimensions of meaning. In Supercomputing ’92: Proceedings of the 1992 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA. 787–796.
SCHU¨ TZE, H. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimination. Computat. Ling. 24, 1, 97–124. SCHU¨ TZE, H. AND PEDERSEN, J. 1995. Information retrieval based on word senses. In Proceedings of SDAIR’95
(Las Vegas, NV). 161–175.
SILBER, H. G. AND MCCOY, K. F. 2003. Efﬁcient text summarization using lexical chains. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (New Orleans, LA). 252–255.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

10:68

R. Navigli

SNOW, R., JURAFSKY, D., AND NG, A. Y. 2006. Semantic taxonomy induction from heterogenous evidence. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics joint with the 21th Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL, Sydney, Australia).
SNYDER, B. AND PALMER, M. 2004. The English all-words task. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain). 41–43.
SOANES, C. AND STEVENSON, A., Eds. 2003. Oxford Dictionary of English. Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K.
STEVENSON, M. AND WILKS, Y. 2001. The interaction of knowledge sources in word sense disambiguation. Computat. Ling. 27, 3, 321–349.
STOKOE, C., OAKES, M. J., AND TAIT, J. I. 2003. Word sense disambiguation in information retrieval revisited. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (Toronto, Onto., Canada). 159–166.
STRAPPARAVA, C., GLIOZZO, A., AND GIULIANO, C. 2004. Pattern abstraction and term similarity for word sense disambiguation: Irst at Senseval-3. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (Senseval-3, Barcelona, Spain). 229– 234.
SUSSNA, M. 1993. Word sense disambiguation for free-text indexing using a massive semantic network. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information and Knowledge Base Management (Washington D.C.). 67–74.
TOWELL, G. AND VOORHEES, E. 1998. Disambiguating highly ambiguous words. Computat. Ling. 24, 1, 125– 145.
TRATZ, S., SANFILIPPO, A., GREGORY, M., CHAPPELL, A., POSSE, C., AND WHITNEY, P. 2007. PNNL: A supervised maximum entropy approach to word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval, Prague, Czech Republic). 264–267.
TSATSARONIS, G., VAZIRGIANNIS, M., AND ANDROUTSOPOULOS, I. 2007. Word sense disambiguation with spreading activation networks generated from thesauri. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI, Hyderabad, India). 1725–1730.
TUFIS, D., CRISTEA, D., AND STAMOU, S. 2004. Balkanet: Aims, methods, results and perspectives. A general overview. Romanian J. Sci. Tech. Inform. (Special Issue on Balkanet) 7, 1-2, 9–43.
TUFIS, D., ION, R., AND IDE, N. 2004. Fine-grained word sense disambiguation based on parallel corpora, word alignment, word clustering, and aligned WordNets. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Geneva, Switzerland).
TURING, A. M. 1950. Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind 54, 443–460.
VAN DONGEN, S. 2000. Graph Clustering by Flow Simulation, Ph.D. dissertation. University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
VEENSTRA, J., DEN BOSCH, A. V., BUCHHOLZ, S., DAELEMANS, W., AND ZAVREL, J. 2000. Memory-based word sense disambiguation. Comput. Human. 34, 1–2.
VE´RONIS, J. 2004. Hyperlex: Lexical cartography for information retrieval. Comput. Speech Lang. 18, 3, 223–252.
VE´RONIS, J. AND IDE, N. 1990. Word sense disambiguation with very large neural networks extracted from machine readable dictionaries. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Helsinki, Finland). 389–394.
VICKREY, D., BIEWALD, L., TEYSSIER, M., AND KOLLER, D. 2005. Word sense disambiguation for machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP, Vancouver, B.C., Canada). 771–778.
VOORHEES, E. M. 1993. Using wordnet to disambiguate word senses for text retrieval. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (Pittsburgh, PA). 171–180.
VOSSEN, P., Ed. 1998. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
WEAVER, W. 1949. Translation. In Machine Translation of Languages: Fourteen Essays (written in 1949, published in 1955), W. N. Locke and A. D. Booth, Eds. Technology Press of MIT, Cambridge, MA, and John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 15–23.
WIDDOWS, D. AND DOROW, B. 2002. A graph model for unsupervised lexical acquisition. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Taipei, Taiwan). 1–7.
WILKS, Y. 1975. Preference semantics. In Formal Semantics of Natural Language, E. L. Keenan, Ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 329–348.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

Word Sense Disambiguation: A Survey

10:69

WILKS, Y. AND SLATOR, B. 1989. Towards semantic structures from dictionary entries. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Rocky Mountain Conference on AI (Boulder, CO). 85–96.
WILKS, Y., SLATOR, B., AND GUTHRIE, L., Eds. 1996. Electric Words: Dictionaries, Computers and Meanings. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
WILKS, Y. A., FASS, D. C., GUO, C.-M., MCDONALD, J. E., PLATE, T., AND BRIAN, B. M. 1990. Providing machinetractable dictionary tools. Mach. Transl. 5, 99–154.
YAROWSKY, D. 1992. Word-sense disambiguation using statistical models of Roget’s categories trained on large corpora. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING, Nantes, France). 454–460.
YAROWSKY, D. 1993. One sense per collocation. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology (Princeton, NJ). 266–271.
YAROWSKY, D. 1994. Decision lists for lexical ambiguity resolution: Application to accent restoration in Spanish and French. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Las Cruces, NM). 88–95.
YAROWSKY, D. 1995. Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Cambridge, MA). 189–196.
YAROWSKY, D. 2000. Hierarchical decision lists for word sense disambiguation. Comput. Human. 34, 1-2, 179–186.
YAROWSKY, D. AND FLORIAN, R. 2002. Evaluating sense disambiguation across diverse parameter spaces. J. Nat. Lang. Eng. 9, 4, 293–310.

Received December 2006; revised January 2008; accepted March 2008

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No. 2, Article 10, Publication date: February 2009.

