Program Synthesis

Program Synthesis
Sumit Gulwani Microsoft Research sumitg@microsoft.com Oleksandr Polozov University of Washington polozov@cs.washington.edu
Rishabh Singh Microsoft Research risin@microsoft.com
Boston — Delft

Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages
Published, sold and distributed by: now Publishers Inc. PO Box 1024 Hanover, MA 02339 United States Tel. +1-781-985-4510 www.nowpublishers.com sales@nowpublishers.com
Outside North America: now Publishers Inc. PO Box 179 2600 AD Delft The Netherlands Tel. +31-6-51115274
The preferred citation for this publication is
S. Gulwani, O. Polozov and R. Singh. Program Synthesis. Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 1–119, 2017.
This Foundations and Trends® issue was typeset in LATEX using a class ﬁle designed by Neal Parikh. Printed on acid-free paper.
ISBN: 978-1-68083-292-1 © 2017 S. Gulwani, O. Polozov and R. Singh
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publishers.
Photocopying. In the USA: This journal is registered at the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of speciﬁc clients, is granted by now Publishers Inc for users registered with the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC). The ‘services’ for users can be found on the internet at: www.copyright.com
For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license, a separate system of payment has been arranged. Authorization does not extend to other kinds of copying, such as that for general distribution, for advertising or promotional purposes, for creating new collective works, or for resale. In the rest of the world: Permission to photocopy must be obtained from the copyright owner. Please apply to now Publishers Inc., PO Box 1024, Hanover, MA 02339, USA; Tel. +1 781 871 0245; www.nowpublishers.com; sales@nowpublishers.com
now Publishers Inc. has an exclusive license to publish this material worldwide. Permission to use this content must be obtained from the copyright license holder. Please apply to now Publishers, PO Box 179, 2600 AD Delft, The Netherlands, www.nowpublishers.com; e-mail: sales@nowpublishers.com

Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages Volume 4, Issue 1-2, 2017 Editorial Board

Editor-in-Chief

Mooly Sagiv Tel Aviv University Israel
Editors

Martín Abadi Google & UC Santa Cruz
Anindya Banerjee IMDEA
Patrick Cousot ENS Paris & NYU
Oege De Moor University of Oxford
Matthias Felleisen Northeastern University
John Field Google
Cormac Flanagan UC Santa Cruz
Philippa Gardner Imperial College
Andrew Gordon Microsoft Research & University of Edinburgh
Dan Grossman University of Washington

Robert Harper CMU
Tim Harris Oracle
Fritz Henglein University of Copenhagen
Rupak Majumdar MPI-SWS & UCLA
Kenneth McMillan Microsoft Research
J. Eliot B. Moss UMass, Amherst
Andrew C. Myers Cornell University
Hanne Riis Nielson TU Denmark
Peter O’Hearn UCL
Benjamin C. Pierce UPenn
Andrew Pitts University of Cambridge

Ganesan Ramalingam Microsoft Research
Mooly Sagiv Tel Aviv University
Davide Sangiorgi University of Bologna
David Schmidt Kansas State University
Peter Sewell University of Cambridge
Scott Stoller Stony Brook University
Peter Stuckey University of Melbourne
Jan Vitek Purdue University
Philip Wadler University of Edinburgh
David Walker Princeton University
Stephanie Weirich UPenn

Editorial Scope

Topics

Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages publishes survey and tutorial articles in the following topics:

• Abstract interpretation
• Compilation and interpretation techniques
• Domain speciﬁc languages
• Formal semantics, including lambda calculi, process calculi, and process algebra
• Language paradigms
• Mechanical proof checking
• Memory management
• Partial evaluation
• Program logic
• Programming language implementation

• Programming language security
• Programming languages for concurrency
• Programming languages for parallelism
• Program synthesis
• Program transformations and optimizations
• Program veriﬁcation
• Runtime techniques for programming languages
• Software model checking
• Static and dynamic program analysis
• Type theory and type systems

Information for Librarians

Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages, 2017, Volume 4, 4 issues. ISSN paper version 2325-1107. ISSN online version 2325-1131. Also available as a combined paper and online subscription.

Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages Vol. 4, No. 1-2 (2017) 1–119 © 2017 S. Gulwani, O. Polozov and R. Singh DOI: 10.1561/2500000010

Program Synthesis

Sumit Gulwani
Microsoft Research sumitg@microsoft.com

Oleksandr Polozov
University of Washington polozov@cs.washington.edu

Rishabh Singh
Microsoft Research risin@microsoft.com

Contents

1 Introduction

3

1.1 Program Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

1.2 Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

1.3 Dimensions in Program Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

1.4 Roadmap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2 Applications

15

2.1 Data Wrangling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2.2 Graphics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

2.3 Code Repair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

2.4 Code Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

2.5 Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

2.6 Superoptimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

2.7 Concurrent Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

3 General Principles

37

3.1 Second-Order Problem Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

3.2 Oracle-Guided Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

3.3 Syntactic Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

3.4 Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

ix

x

4 Enumerative Search

57

4.1 Enumerative Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

4.2 Bidirectional Enumerative Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

4.3 Oﬄine Exhaustive Enumeration and Composition . . . . . 63

5 Constraint Solving

65

5.1 Component-Based Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

5.2 Solver-Aided Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

5.3 Inductive Logic Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

6 Stochastic Search

77

6.1 Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm for Sampling Expressions . 77

6.2 Genetic Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80

6.3 Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84

6.4 Neural Program Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

7 Programming by Examples

91

7.1 Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

7.2 Version Space Algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

7.3 Deduction-Based Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

7.4 Ambiguity Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

8 Future Work

107

Acknowledgements

111

References

113

Abstract
Program synthesis is the task of automatically ﬁnding a program in the underlying programming language that satisﬁes the user intent expressed in the form of some speciﬁcation. Since the inception of AI in the 1950s, this problem has been considered the holy grail of Computer Science. Despite inherent challenges in the problem such as ambiguity of user intent and a typically enormous search space of programs, the ﬁeld of program synthesis has developed many diﬀerent techniques that enable program synthesis in diﬀerent real-life application domains. It is now used successfully in software engineering, biological discovery, computeraided education, end-user programming, and data cleaning. In the last decade, several applications of synthesis in the ﬁeld of programming by examples have been deployed in mass-market industrial products.
This survey is a general overview of the state-of-the-art approaches to program synthesis, its applications, and subﬁelds. We discuss the general principles common to all modern synthesis approaches such as syntactic bias, oracle-guided inductive search, and optimization techniques. We then present a literature review covering the four most common state-of-the-art techniques in program synthesis: enumerative search, constraint solving, stochastic search, and deduction-based programming by examples. We conclude with a brief list of future horizons for the ﬁeld.
S. Gulwani, O. Polozov and R. Singh. Program Synthesis. Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 1–119, 2017. DOI: 10.1561/2500000010.

1
Introduction
1.1 Program Synthesis
Program Synthesis is the task of automatically ﬁnding programs from the underlying programming language that satisfy user intent expressed in some form of constraints. Unlike typical compilers that translate a fully speciﬁed high-level code to low-level machine representation using a syntax-directed translation, program synthesizers typically perform some form of search over the space of programs to generate a program that is consistent with a variety of constraints (e.g. inputoutput examples, demonstrations, natural language, partial programs, and assertions).
The problem of program synthesis has long been considered the holy grail of Computer Science. Pnueli considered program synthesis to be one of the most central problems in the theory of programming [110]. There has been a lot of progress made in this ﬁeld in many diﬀerent communities including programming languages, machine learning, and artiﬁcial intelligence. The idea of constructing interpretable solutions (algorithms) with proofs by composing solutions of smaller sub-problems was considered as early as in 1932 in the early work on constructive Mathematics [70]. After the development of ﬁrst automated theorem
3

4

Introduction

provers, there was a lot of pioneering work on deductive synthesis approaches [41, 85, 144]. The main idea behind these approaches was to use the theorem provers to ﬁrst construct a proof of the user-provided speciﬁcation, and then use the proof to extract the corresponding logical program. Another approach that became popular shortly afterwards was that of transformation-based synthesis [86], where a high-level complete speciﬁcation was transformed repeatedly until achieving the desired low-level program.
The deductive synthesis approaches assumed a complete formal speciﬁcation of the desired user intent was provided, which in many cases proved to be as complicated as writing the program itself. This lead to new inductive synthesis approaches that were based on inductive speciﬁcations such as input-output examples, demonstrations etc. Shaw et al. [125] developed a framework for learning restricted Lisp programs from a single input-output example. Summers [137] and Biermann [13] developed techniques to learn a rich class of LISP programs from multiple input-output examples. Pygmalion [131] was one of the ﬁrst successful programming by demonstration systems that inferred recursive programs from a set of concrete executions of a program. There has also been a lot of pioneering work on using genetic programming approaches to automatically evolve programs that are consistent with a speciﬁcation [73]. These approaches are inspired from Darwin’s theory of evolution, and evolve a random population of programs continuously into new generations until generating the desired programs.
The more recent program synthesis approaches allow a user to additionally provide a skeleton (grammar) of the space of possible programs in addition to the speciﬁcation [3]. This results in two beneﬁts. First, the grammar provides structure to the hypothesis space, which can result in a more eﬃcient search procedure. Second, the learnt programs are also more interpretable since they are derived from the grammar. The Sketch [132] system pioneered this idea to allow programmers to write partial program sketches (programs with holes), which are then automatically completed given some speciﬁcation. FlashFill [43, 49] is perhaps one of the most visible Programming By Examples system that is shipping in Microsoft Excel. FlashFill deﬁnes the hypothesis space of

1.2. Challenges

5

programs using a domain-speciﬁc language of regular expression based string transformations, and uses version-space algebra based synthesis techniques to eﬃciently synthesize string transformation programs from few input-output examples.
Many modern program synthesis applications are built on top of some meta-synthesis framework. Such frameworks allow a user to separately deﬁne a program space (a grammar or a program skeleton) and describe some insights for the synthesis algorithm (e.g. encoding of the synthesis problem into SAT/SMT constraints or inverse semantics of the program’s operators). The framework then automatically converts these deﬁnitions into an eﬃcient synthesizer for the given application domain. Most popular synthesis frameworks include the aforementioned Sketch system [132], the PROSE framework for FlashFill-like programming by examples [113], and the Rosette virtual machine for solver-aided programming [139].

1.2 Challenges
Program synthesis is a notoriously challenging problem. Its inherent challenge lies in two main components of the problem: intractability of the program space and diversity of user intent.

Program Space In its most general formulation (for a Turing-complete programming language and an arbitrary constraint) program synthesis is undecidable, thus almost all successful synthesis approaches perform some kind of search over the program space. This search itself is a hard combinatorial problem. The number of programs in any non-trivial programming language quickly grows exponentially with program size, and this vast number of possible candidates for a long time has rendered the task intractable.
Early approaches to program synthesis focused on deductive and transformational methods [85, 86]. Such methods are based on a exponentially growing tree of theorem-proving deductive inferences or correctness-preserving code rewrite rules, respectively. Both approaches guarantee that the produced program satisﬁes the provided constraint

6

Introduction

by construction but the non-deterministic nature of a theorem-proving or code-rewriting loop cannot guarantee eﬃciency or even termination of the synthesis process. Modern successful applications of similar techniques employ clever domain-speciﬁc heuristics for cutting down the derivation tree (see, for example, [63, 104]).
The last two decades brought a resurgence of program synthesis research with a number of technological and algorithmic breakthroughs. First, Moore’s law and advances in constraint solving allowed exploring larger program spaces in reasonable time. This led to many successful constraint-based synthesis applications tracing their roots back to Sketch and the invention of counterexample-guided inductive synthesis [132]. Second, novel approaches to program space enumeration such as stochastic techniques [105, 123] and deductive top-down search [43, 113] enabled synthesis applications in new domains that were diﬃcult to formalize through theorems and rewrite rules.
However, even though modern-day synthesis techniques produce sizable real-life code snippets, they are still rarely applicable to industrialsize projects. For instance, at the time of this writing, the state-of-the-art superoptimization technique (i.e., synthesizer of shorter implementations of a given function; see §2.6) by Phothilimthana et al. [109] is able to explore a program space of size 1079. In contrast, discovering an expert implementation of the MD5 hash function requires exploring a space of 105943 programs!1 New algorithmic advances and clever exploitation of domain-speciﬁc knowledge to facilitate large program space exploration is an active research area in program synthesis.

User Intent Even armed with an eﬃcient search technique, program synthesizers may not immediately reach the dream of automatic programming. The second challenge in synthesis is accurately expressing and interpreting user intent—the speciﬁcation on the desired program.
Diﬀerent methods for expressing user intent range from formal logical speciﬁcations to informal natural-language descriptions or inputoutput examples. Speciﬁcations on the formal end of this spectrum
1See Rastislav Bodik’s ICFP-2015 keynote talk “Program Synthesis: Opportunities for the Next Decade” for a detailed comparison: https://youtu.be/PI99A08Y83E.

1.3. Dimensions in Program Synthesis

7

(traditionally required by deductive synthesis techniques) often appear to the user as complex as writing the program itself. Speciﬁcations on the informal end, on the other hand, are highly ambiguous. For instance, for a given input-output example (“John Smith” → “Smith, J.”) the program space of FlashFill [43] may contains millions of programs consistent with it. Most of these programs simply overﬁt the example and do not satisfy the spirit of user intent. However, FlashFill has no way to discover this without additional communication from the user.
Many real-life application domains for program synthesis are too complex to be described completely with formal or informal speciﬁcations. First, such a description would likely contain so many implementation details and special cases that it would be comparable in size to the produced program. Second, and most importantly, the users themselves often do not imagine the full scope of their intent until they begin an interaction with a programmer or a program synthesis system. Both of these observations imply that applying program synthesis to larger industrial applications is much a human-computer interaction (HCI) problem as it is an algorithmic one. This survey mostly focuses on algorithmic approaches to program synthesis but we also brieﬂy discuss some HCI-related research in §3.2, 3.3 and 7.4.

1.3 Dimensions in Program Synthesis
A synthesizer is typically characterized by three key dimensions: the kind of constraints that it accepts as expression of user intent, the space of programs over which it searches, and the search technique it employs [42]. The synthesized program may be explicitly presented to the user for debugging, re-use, or for being incorporated as part of a larger workﬂow. However, in some cases, the synthesized program may be implicit and is simply used to automate the intended one-oﬀ task for the user, as in case of spreadsheet string transformations [43].
1.3.1 User Intent
The user intent can be expressed in various forms including logical speciﬁcation, examples [44], traces, natural language [28, 46, 79], partial

8

Introduction

programs [132], or even related programs. A particular choice may be more suited in a given scenario depending on the underlying task as well as on the technical background of the user.
A logical speciﬁcation is a logical relation between inputs and outputs of a program. It can act as a precise and succinct form of functional speciﬁcation of the desired program. However, complete logical speciﬁcations are often quite tricky to write.
End users, who are not programming experts, may ﬁnd providing examples as more approachable and natural. Example-based speciﬁcations more generally include asserting properties of the output (as opposed to specifying the full output) on a given input state [113]. A key challenge in this environment is that of resolving ambiguity that is inherent in the example-based speciﬁcation. Such an ambiguity is often resolved in an interactive loop with the user, where the user may iteratively provide more examples dependant on the behavior of the program synthesized in the last step.
A trace is a detailed step-by-step description of how the program should behave on a given input. A trace is a more detailed description than an input-output example since it also illustrates how a speciﬁc input should be transformed into the corresponding output as opposed to just describing what the output should be. Traces are an appropriate model for programming by demonstration systems [25], where the intermediate states resulting from the user’s successive actions on a user interface constitute a valid trace. From the perspective of the synthesizer, traces are preferable to input-output examples since the former contains more information. From the user’s perspective, providing demonstrations in may be more taxing in general than providing input-output examples.
In some cases, a program itself might act as the best means of specifying the intent. This happens trivially for certain applications such as superoptimization [9, 109], deobfuscation [59] and synthesis of program inverses [134], where the program to be optimized, deobfuscated, or inverted respectively forms the speciﬁcation. However, even for applications such as discovery of new algorithms [47], users might ﬁnd it easier to write the speciﬁcation as an ineﬃcient program rather than a logical relation.

1.3. Dimensions in Program Synthesis

9

1.3.2 Search Space
The search space should strike a good balance between expressiveness and eﬃciency. On one hand, the space should be large/expressive enough to include a large class of programs for the underlying domain. While on the other hand, the space of the programs should be restrictive enough so that it is amenable to eﬃcient search, and it should be over a domain of programs that are amenable to eﬃcient reasoning.
The search space can be over imperative or functional programs (with possible restrictions on the control structure or the operator set), The program space can be restricted to a subset of an existing programming language (general purpose or domain-speciﬁc) or to a speciﬁcally designed domain-speciﬁc language. The space of programs can be qualiﬁed by at least two attributes: (i) the operators used in the program, and (ii) the control structure of the program. The control structure of the program may be restricted to a user-provided looping template [135], a partial program with holes [132], straight-line programs [8, 47, 63, 87, 109], or a guarded statement set with control ﬂow at the very top [43].
The search space can even be over restricted models of computations such as regular or context-free grammars/transducers. Regular expression synthesis can be used for constructing text editing programs [100]. Context-free grammar synthesis is useful for paser construction [81]. Succinct logical representations may also serve as a good choice for the search space. For instance, class of ﬁrst order logic together with ﬁxed point equals the class of PTIME algorithms over ordered structures such as graphs, trees, and strings. Hence, this class and also some of its useful subclasses (such as those with a ﬁxed quantiﬁer depth) can serve as good target languages for synthesizing eﬃcient graph or tree algorithms [57].

1.3.3 Search Technique
The search technique can be based on enumerative search, deduction, constraint solving, statistical techniques, or some combination of these.

10

Introduction

Enumerative An enumerative search technique enumerates programs in the underlying search space in some order and for each program checks whether or not it satisﬁes the synthesis constraints. While this might appear simple, it is often a very eﬀective strategy. A naïve implementation of enumerative search often does not scale. Many practical systems that leverage enumerative search innovate by developing various optimizations for pruning the search space or by ordering it.

Deductive The deductive top-down search [113] follows the standard divide-and-conquer technique, where the key idea is to recursively reduce the problem of synthesizing a program expression e of a certain kind and that satisﬁes a certain speciﬁcation φ to simpler sub-problems (where the search is either over sub-expressions of e or over sub-speciﬁcations of φ), followed by appropriately combining those results. The reduction logic for reducing a synthesis problem to simpler synthesis problems depends on the nature of the involved expression e and the inductive speciﬁcation φ. In particular, if e is of the form F (e1, e2), the reduction logic leverages the inverse semantics of F to push constraints on e down through the grammar into constraints on e1 and e2.
While enumerative search is bottom-up (i.e., it enumerates smaller sub-expressions before enumerating larger expressions), the deductive search is top-down (i.e., it ﬁxes the top-part of an expression and then searches for its sub-expressions). Enumerative search can be seen as ﬁnding a programmatic path (within an underlying grammar that connects inputs and outputs) starting from the inputs to outputs. Deduction does the same, but it searches for the programmatic path in a backward direction starting from the outputs leveraging the operator inverses. If the underlying grammar allows for a rich set of constants, the bottom-up enumerative search can get lost in simply guessing the right constants. On the other hand, the top-down deductive technique can deduce constants based on the accumulated constraints as the last step in the search process.

Constraint Solving The constraint solving based techniques [132, 135] involve two main steps: constraint generation, and constraint resolution.

1.3. Dimensions in Program Synthesis

11

Constraint generation refers to the process of generating a logical constraint whose solution will yield the intended program. Generating such a logical constraint typically requires making some assumption about the control ﬂow of the unknown program and encoding that control ﬂow in some manner. Three diﬀerent kinds of methods have been used in the past for constraint generation: invariant-based, path-based, and input-based. On one extreme, we have invariant-based methods that generate constraints that faithfully assert that the program satisﬁes the given speciﬁcation [133].
Such methods also end up synthesizing an inductive proof of correctness in addition to the program itself. A disadvantage of such methods is that the generated constraints may be very sophisticated since the inductive invariants are often much more complicated and over a richer logic than the program itself. On the other extreme, we have inputbased methods that generate constraints that assert that the program satisﬁes the given speciﬁcation on a certain collection of inputs [132]. Such constraints are usually much simpler in nature than the ones generated by the invariant-bases method. Unless paired with a sound counterexample guided inductive synthesis strategy (CEGIS), described in §3.2, this method trades oﬀ soundness for eﬃciency. A middle ground is achieved by path-based methods that generate constraints that assert that the program satisﬁes the given speciﬁcation on all inputs that execute a certain set of paths [134]. Compared to input-based methods, these methods may achieve a faster convergence, if paired up with an outer CEGIS loop.
Constraint solving involves solving the constraints outputted by the constraint generation phase. These constraints often involve secondorder unknowns and universal quantiﬁers. A general strategy is to ﬁrst reduce the second-order unknowns to ﬁrst-order unknowns and then eliminate universal quantiﬁers, and then solve the resulting ﬁrst-order quantiﬁer-free constraints using an oﬀ-the-shelf SAT/SMT solver. The second-order unknowns are reduced to ﬁrst-order unknowns by use of templates. The universal quantiﬁers can be eliminated using a variety of strategies including Farkas lemma, cover algorithms, and sampling.

12

Introduction

Statistical Various kinds of statistical techniques have been proposed including machine learning of probabilistic grammars, genetic programming, MCMC sampling, and probabilistic inference.
Machine learning techniques can be used to augment other search methodologies based on enumerative search or deduction by providing likelihood of various choices at any choice point. One such choice point is selection of a production for a non-terminal in a grammar that speciﬁes the underlying program space. The likelihood probabilities can be function of certain cues found in the input-ouput examples provided by the user or the additionally available inputs [89]. These functions are learned in an oﬄine phase from training data.
Genetic programming is a program synthesis method inspired by biological evolution [72]. It involves maintaining a population of individual programs, and using that to produce program variants by leveraging computational analogs of biological mutation and crossover. Mutation introduces random changes, while crossover facilitates sharing of useful pieces of code between programs being evolved. Each variant’s suitability is evaluated using a user-deﬁned ﬁtness function, and successful variants are selected for continued evolution. The success of a genetic programming based system crucially depends on the ﬁtness function. Genetic programming has been used to discover mutual exclusion algorithms [68] and to ﬁx bugs in imperative programs [146]
MCMC sampling has been used to search for a desired program starting from a given candidate. The success crucially depends on deﬁning a smooth cost metric for Boolean constraints. STOKE [124], a superoptimization tool, uses Hamming distance to measure closeness of generated bit-values to the target on a representative test input set, and rewards generation of (almost) correct values in incorrect locations.
Probabilistic inference has been used to evolve a given program by making local changes, one at a time. This relies on modeling a program as a graph of instructions and states, connected by constraint nodes. Each constraint node establishes the semantics of some instruction by relating the instruction with the state immediately before the instruction and the state immediately after the instruction [45]. Belief propagation

1.4. Roadmap

13

has been used to synthesize imperative program fragments that execute polynomial computations and list manipulations [62].
1.4 Roadmap
This survey is organized as follows. We start out by discussing some prominent applications of program synthesis in Chapter 2. We then discuss some general principles used across many synthesis techniques in Chapter 3. We then describe the four key search techniques: enumerative (Chapter 4), constraint-solving based (Chapter 5), stochastic (Chapter 6), and deduction-based programming by examples (Chapter 7). Chapter 8 concludes with some discussion on future work.

2
Applications
2.1 Data Wrangling
While the digital revolution resulted in massive digitization of human generated data, the past few years have seen an explosive growth in machine generated data because of cloud computing and IoT (Internet of Things). Data is the new oil. It is the new currency of the digital world that enables business decisions, advertising, and recommendations.
Data Wrangling refers to the process of cleaning, transforming, and preparing data from its raw semi-structured format to a more structured format that is amenable for analysis and presentation. It is estimated that data engineers/scientists spend 80% of their time in data wrangling to bring the data into a form where they can apply machine learning techniques to draw appropriate insights from. A typical data wrangling pipeline involves various kinds of activities including extraction, transformation, and formatting, which we discuss below. PBE can enable easier and faster data wrangling [44]. In case of one-oﬀ scenarios that deal with small-sized data that is easy to eye-ball, the user interaction with the system can happen simply at the level of examples and the synthesized program may be hidden from the user. However, when the user intends to execute the synthesized program multiple
15

16

Applications

times or over big data, the user may want to inspect the program to validate its correctness on unseen inputs.
2.1.1 Transformations
One of the most useful applications of program synthesis has been in the context of string or other datatype transformations. This is a task that is routinely performed by many people, and most of those people do not have the programming expertise to automate it.
Languages like Perl, Awk, Python came into existence to support efﬁcient string/text processing, while mainstream languages like Java/C# already provide a rich support for string processing. Even spreadsheet systems like Microsoft Excel allow users to write macros using a rich inbuilt library of string and numerical functions. There are around one billion users of such spreadsheet systems. Unfortunately, 99% of those users are not proﬁcient in programming; they ﬁnd it too diﬃcult to write desired macros or scripts. A case study of spreadsheet help forums identiﬁed that string processing is one of the most common class of programming problems that end users struggle with [43]. These users described the speciﬁcation of an intended program to the experts on the other side of the help forums using examples. Since examples may lead to underspeciﬁcation, the interaction between the user and the expert often involved a few rounds of communication (over multiple days). PBE is the ideal technology to automate such interactions.
Syntactic String Transformations Consider, for instance, the task of converting an email address of the form “Firstname.Lastname@domain” to “ﬁrstname lastname” as illustrated in Figure 2.1. Such syntactic transformations are useful for converting strings from one format to another, normalizing strings into a uniﬁed format, cleaning incorrectly formatted strings. The FlashFill PBE technology [43] can generate an intended program for such syntactic string transformations once the user provides a representative set of examples.
Semantic String Transformations Some string transformation tasks also require making use of some background knowledge that is encoded

2.1. Data Wrangling

17

Figure 2.1: The FlashFill PBE technology, released in Excel 2013, can automate syntactic string transformations. Once the user provides one instance of the transformation (row 2, col. B) and proceeds to transforming another instance (row 3, col. B), FlashFill synthesizes an intended program and applies it to the remaining rows to populate col. B.
in the form of relational tables. Figure 2.2 illustrates such as task. The task requires performing a join of two (bottom) tables, then indexing the resultant table with the input columns (from the top table). The task also requires performing syntactic transformations before indexing and on the values read after indexing.
Number and Date Transformations PBE can also be useful for number transformations [126] and date transformations [129]. Consider the task of formatting numbers to two decimal places in Figure 2.3(a). A task even as simple as this would require a programmer to discover/recall the format descriptor in the underlying programming language as shown in Figure 2.3(b). In contrast, examples act as a natural means

18

Applications

Input v1
Stroller Bib Diapers Wipes Aspirator

Input v2
10/12/2010 23/12/2010 21/1/2011 2/4/2009 23/2/2010

Output
$145.67+0.30*145.67 $3.56+0.45*3.56 $21.45+0.35*21.45 $5.12+0.40*5.12 $2.56+0.30*2.56

Id
S30 B56 D32 W98 A46 ···

MarkupRec

Name

Markup

Stroller 30%

Bib

45%

Diapers 35%

Wipes

40%

Aspirator 30%

···

···

Id
S30 S30 B56 D32 W98 A46 ···

CostRec

Date Price

12/2010 11/2010 12/2010 1/2011 4/2009 2/2010 ···

$145.67 $142.38 $3.56 $21.45 $5.12 $2.56 ···

Figure 2.2: A semantic string transformation that requires performing syntactic manipulations on multiple lookup results. The goal is to compute the selling price of an item (Output) from its name (Input v1) and selling date (Input v2) using the MarkupRec and CostRec tables. The selling price of an item is computed by adding
its purchase price (for the corresponding month) to its markup charges, which in
turn is calculated by multiplying the markup percentage by the purchase price. Such
transformations can be inferred by examples [127].

of describing intent in such cases, and PBE can be used to automate such tasks. The PBE paradigm also naturally extends to enabling more sophisticated transformations of the kind shown in Figure 2.3(c) and Figure 2.3(d).
Splitting Transformations Splitting involves extracting the various sub-ﬁelds from a long string. For instance, consider the input column and the desired output table in Figure 2.4. Performing the desired splitting is challenging since there are multiple delimiters and not all occurrences of a delimiter string are actual delimiters. Again, examples can serve as a natural means for expressing intent in such cases.
While the above-mentioned transformations convert a tuple of strings into another string, the splitting transformation converts a string into

2.1. Data Wrangling

19

Input
123.4567 123.4 78.234

Output
123.46 123.40 78.23

(a)

Language
Excel, C# Python, C
Java

Format descriptor for rounding to
two decimal places
#.00 .2f
#.##

(b)

Input
0d 5h 26m 0d 4h 57m 0d 4h 27m 0d 3h 57m

Output
5:00 4:30 4:00 3:30

(c)

Input
08/21/2010 07/24/2010 20.08.2010 23.08.2010 2010-06-07 2010-24-08

Output
08/21/2010 07/24/2010 08/20/2010 08/23/2010 07/06/2010 08/24/2010

(d)

Figure 2.3: Sample number and date transformations that can be automated using PBE: (a) Rounding to two decimal places, (c) Nearest lower half hour, (d) Formatting dates to a consistent format. (b) shows the format descriptors in diﬀerent programming languages required to perform the rounding transformation in (a).

a tuple of strings. Though splitting can be seen as multiple instances of a string transformation, this view does not leverage the speciﬁc cues about the splitting intent. Leveraging that domain knowledge, in fact, enables a predictive synthesis technique for splitting [116], wherein the intended splitting can be performed without any user speciﬁcation but from just the input data.
2.1.2 Extraction
Data is locked up into documents of various types such as text/log ﬁles, semi-structured spreadsheets, webpages, JSON, XML, and pdf documents. These documents oﬀer great ﬂexibility for storing and

20

Applications

(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: PBE can be used for column splitting: (a) input data column, (b) output columns.

2.1. Data Wrangling

21

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.5: FlashRelate can transform the semi-structured table (a) into the output structured table (b) once the user provides a couple of examples of tuples in the output table, for instance, the ones highlighted in orange and green, respectively.

organizing hierarchical data by combining presentation/formatting with the underlying data. However, this ﬂexibility makes it hard to perform tasks such as querying or transforming data in content or to another storage format. The ability to extract data out of such documents into a structured tabular form can facilitate such desired processing using appropriate data-processing tools.
The FlashRelate PBE technology allows extracting tabular/relational data from semi-structured spreadsheets. The two-dimensional grid structure of a spreadsheet leads to creative solutions for storing higher-dimensional data through use of spatial layouts involving headers, whitespace, and relative positioning. While this leads to compact and intuitive visual representations of data well suited for human understanding, such encodings complicate the use of powerful data-manipulation tools (e.g., relational query engines) that expect data in a certain form. We call these spreadsheets semi-structured because their data is in a regular format that is nonetheless inaccessible to data-processing tools. It is conjectured that around 50% of spreadsheets contain data in this not-easy-to-use format. FlashRelate allows a user to provide examples of tuples in the output table—it then synthesizes a program to extract more such tuples from the input semi-structured spreadsheet. Figure 2.5 illustrates the capability of FlashRelate.

22

Applications

The FlashExtract PBE technology allows extracting structured (tabular or hierarchical) data from semi-structured text/log ﬁles and webpages. For each ﬁeld in the output data schema, the user provides positive/negative instances of that ﬁeld and FlashExtract generates a program to extract all instances of that ﬁeld. Figure 2.6 illustrates the capability of FlashExtract. The FlashExtract technology has been shipped in two Microsoft products: (i) ConvertFrom-String cmdlet in Powershell in Windows 10, wherein the user provides examples of the strings to be extracted by inserting tags around them in text. Several Microsoft MVPs (Most Valued Professionals) have built UI experiences on top of this cmdlet. (ii) Custom Fields feature in Microsoft Operations Management Suite—a SAAS service for IT professionals to collect machine data from any cloud and get operational insights. This feature allows extracting custom ﬁelds from log ﬁles by providing examples.

2.1.3 Layout
Users sometimes want to perform layout transformations of data organized in tables or tree-shaped structures like XML/JSON. Such transformations do not change the textual content of any data element, but they rearrange the layout of the data, i.e. the manner in which the various data elements are spatially/logically arranged or grouped.
For instance, consider the directory structure of music ﬁles shown in Figure 2.8(a). The user may want to categorize her music based on ﬁle type while also maintaining the original organization based on genre as shown in Figure 2.8(b). PBE techniques can help automate such transformations, thereby obviating the need to write bash scripts or XSLT expressions for transforming such hierarchically structured data [149].
Another interesting class of layout transformations is that of reformatting semi-structured tables in spreadsheets. This is challenging because of their special layout or formatting attributes such as subheaders, footers, and ﬁlter cells (blank cells or cells with some special characters to aid visual readability of table content). For instance, consider the reformatting task illustrated in Figure 2.7. Examples can again

2.2. Graphics

23

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.6: FlashExtract enables tabular data extraction from text/log ﬁles and web pages using examples. Once the user highlights one or two examples of each ﬁeld in a diﬀerent color (in the text ﬁle on the left side), FlashExtract extracts more such instances and arranges them in a structured data format (table on the right side).

act as a natural means of describing intent in such cases and PBE techniques can help automate such transformations [52].
2.2 Graphics
Synthesizing programs for constructing graphical objects has many applications.
Constructive programmatic descriptions of graphical objects can enable dynamic geometry that can lead to quick recomputation of coordinates of various dependant points after a new value is assigned to a free variable. This can enable interactive editing experiences and eﬃcient animations. Program synthesis techniques have been applied to

24

Applications

PROJ SPEC SPEC SPEC SPEC SPEC

CAT OOH OOH Print Print Print

SPONSOR Inﬁniti Inﬁniti
Inﬁniti

DEPT Design Desing Design Design Design

ELTS elt 1 elt 2 elt 3 elt 4 elt 5

DUE 11/10
11/30 11/30 11/30

Inﬁniti Inﬁniti
Inﬁniti

Design Desing
Design Design Design

SPEC OOH elt 1 elt 2 Print elt 3 elt 4 elt 5

11/10
11/30 11/30 11/30

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.7: PBE can help automate reformatting transformations over semistructured spreadsheet tables: (a) Example input table, (b) Example output table.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.8: PBE can help automate transformations on tree-structured data like directory structure [149].

2.2. Graphics

25

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2.9: PBE can be used for constructing structured repetitive drawings from a few examples of the repetitive drawing elements: (a) Lines moving on a circle pattern, (b) Linear pattern, (c) Polylines moving on circle pattern.

generate solutions to geometry construction problems of the kind found in high-school curriculum [48].
Images and drawings sometimes contain structured repetition as in brick patterns, tiling patterns, and architectural drawings. Figure 2.9 illustrates some such drawings. Constructing such drawings requires the user to write a script using CAD APIs or perform tedious copy-paste operations with some underlying mathematical logic. PBE can be to used to construct such structured drawings, wherein the user provides a few examples of repetitive drawing elements, and the underlying system predicts the next elements in the sequence [21].
PBE can bring together the complementary strengths of direct manipulation and programmatic manipulation. While direct manipulation enables easy (but simple) manipulation of a concrete object, programmatic manipulation allows for much more freedom and reusability (but requires skill). Gulwani et.al. have proposed an approach that enables construction of complex shell scripts in steps, where the user provides examples for each step [50]. Chugh et.al. have proposed an approach called prodirect manipulation that enables creation and modiﬁcation of programs using GUI-based manipulation for the domain of scalable vector graphics [23, 53]. The user draws shapes, relates their attributes, groups and edits them using the GUI, and the drawing is kept synchronized with an underlying program. The various GUI-based actions translate to constraints over example drawing. Constraint solvers are used to generate candidate modiﬁcations to the underlying program so that the resultant program execution generates a drawing satisfying

26

Applications

those constraints. Smart heuristics are used to select an intended modiﬁcation from among the many solutions. A skilled user can edit the resulting program during any step to reﬁne the automatically generated modiﬁcation or to implement some new functionality.
Example 2.1. Consider the task of drawing three equi-distant rectangles as shown in Figure 2.10(d) using the SKETCH-N-SKETCH tool [53] that implements prodirect manipulation. The user starts out by drawing a single rectangle using the GUI (Figure 2.10(a)), which results in the code shown in Figure 2.10(e). The user then makes two copies of the rectangle and drags them, roughly aligning them in the vertical direction and roughly spacing them evenly in the horizontal direction. The user then invokes the Merge selection over the three rectangles to indicate a relationship and the tool abstracts the underlying representation to the code shown in Figure 2.10(f). The user then performs the MakeEqual selection over the y-positions of the boxes (Figure 2.10(b)), followed by DigHole selection over the x-positions of the boxes (Figure 2.10(c)), resulting in the refactored code shown in Figure 2.10(g). The user then manually text-edits the hole to redeﬁne rect2x to bind the result of the expression (+rect1x (/ (-rect3x rect1x) 2)) to encode the desired spacing (since there isn’t a built-in GUI selection for “distributing” the shapes), resulting in the intended drawing in Figure 2.10(d).

2.3 Code Repair
There have been many synthesis techniques recently developed for the code repair problem [26, 60, 99, 130]. Given a buggy program P and a speciﬁcation φ, the code repair problem requires to compute modiﬁcations to the buggy program to obtain a new program P’ such that P’ now satisﬁes the speciﬁcation φ. The general idea of these techniques is to ﬁrst insert alternate choices for the expressions present in the buggy program and then use synthesis techniques to ﬁnd replacements or modiﬁcations of the expressions from the inserted choices such that the updated program satisﬁes the given speciﬁcation. Some example code repairs generated by the SemFix [99] and AutoProf [130] systems are shown in Figure 2.11 and Figure 2.12 respectively.

2.3. Code Repair

27

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(def rect1 (let [x y w h color] [50 60 40 90 (rect color x y w h)))
(def main (svg [rect1]))

blue ]

(e)

(def customRect (λ (x y) (let [w h color] [40 90 blue ] (rect color x y w h))))
(def main (svg[ (customRect 50 60) (customRect 110 73) (customRect 200 55) ]))
(f)

(def y 60); Variable to equate values ; Variables and Hole to relate Values (def [rect1x rect2x rect3x] [50 110 200]) (def main (svg[ (customRect rect1x y) (customRect rect2x y)
(customRect rect3x y) ]))
(g)

Figure 2.10: Prodirect Manipulation using SKETCH-N-SKETCH [53]. The user arrives at the diagram in (d) by going through the intermediate stages in (a), (b), and (c). Correspondingly, the underlying code evolves as shown in (e), (f), and, (g).

28

Applications

Test set

Input

Output

inb usep dsep expected actual

1 0 100

0

0

1 11 110

1

0

0 100 50

1

1

1 -20 60

1

0

0 0 10

0

0

1 int buggy(int inb, int usep, int dsep) {

2 int bias;

3 if (inhb)

4

bias = dsep; //fix: bias = usep+100

5 else

6

bias = usep;

7 if (bias > dsep)

8

return 1;

9 else

10

return 0;

11 }

Figure 2.11: An example code repair synthesized by the SemFix [99] on a Tcas benchmark using the set of passing and failing test cases.

Given a buggy program P and a test suite T consisting of both passing and failing test cases, SemFix ﬁrst uses statistical fault localization techniques to generate a list of program statements ranked by their suspiciousness of being the cause of the bug. It then iteratively tries to repair statements in the order of their suspiciousness until a successful repair is generated. For a given statement, it replaces the statement with an unknown function over the live variables, and uses component-based synthesis to compute the unknown function such that it satisﬁes the constraints obtained from the testcases.
AutoProf uses constraint-based synthesis to repair student submissions. Unlike SemFix, AutoProf uses the reference implementation as the speciﬁcation. It ﬁrst uses an error model (corresponding to common mistakes that students typically make on a given assignment) to

2.3. Code Repair

29

1 def computeDeriv(pol):

Generated Feedback (Repair)

2 deriv = []

3 zero = 0

The program requires 3 changes:

4 if (len(pol)==1):

• In the return statement return deriv

5

return deriv

in line 5, replace deriv by [0].

6 for e in range(0, len(pol)):

7

if (pol[e]==0):

• In the comparison expression (pol[e]

8

zero += 1

== 0) in line 7, change (pol[e] ==

9

else:

0) to False.

10

deriv.append(pol[e]*e) • In the expression range(0, len(pol))

11 return deriv

in line 6, change 0 to 1.

Figure 2.12: An example repair generated by the AutoProf [130] system on a student submission to an introductory programming course on the edX platform.

deﬁne the space of modiﬁcations to a student program. It then uses the Sketch solver to ﬁnd minimum number of changes (from the space of modiﬁcations) to the student submission such that it becomes functionally equivalent to the reference implementation. Similar synthesis techniques have also been developed for auto-grading assignments for an Embedded systems laboratory course [65] and was recently deployed for a MOOC course. Recently, a technique has been proposed to also take into account semantic distance in addition to syntactic distance to compute better repairs for student submissions [26].
There are also some game-based repair techniques [60]. The game consists of the product of a modiﬁed version of the program and an automaton representing the LTL speciﬁcation of the program. The program game is an LTL game that captures the possible repairs of the program by making some values in the program unknown. The game is played between the environment that provides the inputs and the system that provides the correct value for the unknown expression. The game is won if for any input, the system can provide a value for the unknowns such that the speciﬁcation is satisﬁed. The repair technique computes a memoryless winning strategy for the game, which corresponds to a repair for the buggy program.

30
2.4 Code Suggestions

Applications

Finding code suggestions or completing code snippets is a direct application of program synthesis to software engineering, in the spirit of the original vision of the ﬁeld. Most modern code editors and IDEs include an “autocompletion” capability, which predicts the next likely token in the program based on the previously typed ones (e.g., IntelliSense in Microsoft Visual Studio or Content Assist in Eclipse). Program synthesis has the potential to enhance this capability by automatically completing whole snippets of code instead of single tokens. In addition, it can take into account optional annotations about the desired snippet properties from the programmer such as expression types or keywords in the identiﬁers.
Automatic code completion is particularly handy in the presence of unfamiliar APIs. Modern software libraries/framework include tens of thousands of members, which are diﬃcult to navigate for an outsider. A programmer often needs to write a multi-line snippet composing multiple unconnected API calls in order to accomplish a task. Researchers in program synthesis have proposed several approaches to resolve this issue, most notable being statistical models [114], type-directed completion [106], and tools like InSynth [51] and Bing Developer Assistant [151].
Statistical techniques, employed by Raychev et al. [114] and Zhang et al. [151], use probabilistic models to solve the synthesis problem in whole or in part. They leverage the vast dataset of Web code snippets from GitHub, StackOverﬂow, and other programmer networks (colloquially known as “Big Code”) to build a model of API call sequences [114] or to ﬁnd a snippet matching a given natural language query [151]. In [114], API call sequences are treated similarly to textual sentences, and modelled using N -gram or RNN-based language models. In [151], a user-provided query like “how to save an image” is submitted to a search engine, and then the discovered code snippets are transformed to ﬁt the user’s code context (e.g. input/output variable names). Both projects share some common important characteristics:

2.5. Modeling

31

• They require a logic-based component to analyze data ﬂow and control ﬂow of the synthesized snippets, since treating programs purely as text is likely to produce nonsensical output.
• They rely on some high-quality ranking function to present a list of suggestions to the user. This ranking function commonly involves a mix of statistically induced similarity scores based on the user’s query and dataset, and some heuristically chosen weights for precise tailoring.
Both approaches are highly successful. Raychev et al. predict the desired completion among top 3 suggestions in more than 90% of cases. Bing Developer Assistant was released as a Visual Studio extension with more than 600K downloads and mostly positive reviews. According to Zhang et al., it saved 28% of the time for the programmers in their experimental study.
Gvero et al. [51] and Perelman et al. [106] use typing information as a primary driver behind their completion approaches. Both projects solve the problem of synthesizing a snippet of API calls from a partial program (optionally annotated with keywords or type information). They solve it using enumerative search (forward in [106] and backward in [51]), augmented with a ranking function and space abstractions.
The key part of both algorithms is some form of space abstraction. It leverages type information to reformulate the synthesis problem in a more concise and abstract program space. The particular abstraction techniques vary: Gvero et al. introduce an abstract lambda calculus based on succinct types (i.e. program types grouped by equivalence modulo products and currying), and Perelman et al. infer abstract types such as “path” or “font family name” based on usage patterns. This abstraction makes the enumerative search tractable, bringing its runtime to a fraction of a second for a typical query.
2.5 Modeling
Probabilistic modeling is a technique for analysis of complex dependent systems based on empirical evidence. The most widespread tools for probabilistic modeling are various forms of machine learning: Markov

32

Applications

models, neural networks, Bayesian networks, etc. Typically, a probabilistic model involves two components: a structure of the system (i.e. a description of dependencies between system components) and its parameters (i.e. particular statistical distributions for all component). Most forms of machine learning focus on inferring parameters of the model, assuming a given structure such as linear regression. Program synthesis has been applied to learning the model structure in a form of a probabilistic program [101].
Figure 2.13 shows an example of a sketch for a probabilistic program for modeling player skills in an online game, together with associated empirical evidence: some sample outcomes of such games. In this sketch, the assumed distributions for the system components (that is, player skills and their performances in individual games) are replaced with holes. The programmer also annotates holes with hypothesized dependencies between the components. The PSketch system [101] takes this sketch and a dataset as an input, and completes the sketch by synthesizing probabilistic expressions for the holes that match the empirical evidence. The synthesis problem includes both the model structure (that is, which distributions should be chosen for the components) and its parameters.

2.6 Superoptimization
Superoptimization is the task of synthesizing an optimal sequence of instructions (over some target architecture) that is functionally equivalent to a given piece of code [87].
Superoptimization is used to generate optimized machine code. The traditional application is to optimize straight-line code fragments [9, 109]. However, it has also been applied to optimize loop fragments in the context of auto-vectorization [12]. Superoptimization has also been used to synthesize bitvector programs, which combine arithmetic and bitwise operations. Bitvector programs can be quite unintuitive and extremely diﬃcult for average, or sometimes even expert, programmers to discover methodically. Consider, for example, the problem of computing the average of two numbers x and y without using conditionals. Note that (x + y)/2 is not correct since the computation can overﬂow. Instead

2.6. Superoptimization

33

Sketch:
1 2 3 4 5 6
8 9 10
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

struct game { int id; int p1; int p2; int result;
}
double[] TSSketch(struct game[] games, int count) { double[] skills; int[] r;
for i=0 to count-1 skills[i] := ??;
foreach g in games r[g.id] = ??(skills[g.p1], skills[g.p2]);
foreach g in games observe(g.result == r[g.id]);
return skills; }

Data:

m.p1
0 1 0

m.p2
1 2 2

result
1 1 1

id skill
0 105 1 95 2 90

Figure 2.13: A sketch of a probabilistic program for a TrueSkill model [55], and associated evidence data (re-used from [101]). The holes ?? should be replaced with
synthesized probabilistic expressions so that the entire program best matches the data. For this example, the ﬁrst hole is ﬁlled in with Gaussian(100, 10) and the second one with Gaussian(skills[g.p1], 15) > Gaussian(skills[g.p2], 15).

34

Applications

this can be achieved using the following composition of bitwise and arithmetic operators: (x|y) − ((x ⊕ y) >> 1).
One approach to superoptimization has been to simply enumerate sequences of increasing length or cost, testing each for equality with the target speciﬁcation [87]. Another approach has been to constrain the search space to a set of equality-preserving transformations expressed by the system designer [63] and then select the one with the lowest cost. Yet another approach has been to reduce the code sequence search problem to that of SAT/SMT constraint solving, thereby allowing use of powerful oﬀ-the-shelf constraint solvers [47].
Sometimes superoptimization can be too expensive to be performed during a compilation phase. One scalability paradigm has been to generate general purpose peephole optimizers in an oﬄine phase—by automatically discovering replacement rules mapping original sequences to their optimized counterparts and organizing them into a lookup table [8]. Another paradigm has been to develop new optimization techniques. The LENS algorithm [109] does this elegantly in the context of enumerative search methods—it leverages an elegant memoization strategy, wherein it computes programs of bounded size that satisfy a given set of examples and incrementally reﬁnes these programs with more examples in the next iteration. The algorithm also leverages a powerful meet-in-the-middle pruning technique based on bidirectional search, where the candidate programs are enumerated forward from input states and also backward from output states.

2.7 Concurrent Programming
Writing concurrent programs with eﬃcient synchronization is a challenging and error-prone task even for proﬁcient programmers. There have been several synthesis techniques designed to help programmers write such complex code, e.g. by automatically synthesizing placement of minimal synchronization constructs in a concurrent program [17, 143] or by inferring placement of memory fences in concurrent programs running on relaxed memory models [75]. The Abstraction-Guided Synthesis (AGS) [143] technique models the problem of eﬃcient synchronization

2.7. Concurrent Programming

35

T1 { x += z; x += z; }

T2 { z++; z++; }

T3 { y1 = f(x); y2 = x; assert (y1 != y2) }

f(x){ if(x==1) return 3; if(x==2) return 6; return 5; }

Figure 2.14: A simple example program executing three processes T1, T2, and T3 in parallel taken from [143].

inference in a given concurrent program as one in which both the abstraction of the program (using abstract interpretation) and the program itself are allowed to be modiﬁed until the abstraction becomes precise enough to verify the program.
Consider a simple example of a program executing three processes T1|T2|T3 in parallel in Figure 2.14 taken from [143]. The variables y1 and y2 in T3 can take diﬀerent values depending upon the diﬀerent interleavings of the statements in the processes. For example, the interleaving z++; x+=z; x+=z; y1=f(x); y2=x; z++; assert results in the values {y1=6, y2=2}, whereas the interleaving x+=z; x+=z; y1=f(x); y2=x; z++; z++; assert results in {y1=5, y2=0}. The interleaving z++; x+=z; y1=f(x); z++; x+=z; y2=x;assert results in the assertion violation with {y1=3, y2=3}. The goal of the synthesis process is to place minimal synchronization such that the safety requirements are met, i.e. the assert statement in T3 is satisﬁed.
The AGS algorithm ﬁrst performs an abstract interpretation of the program using an abstract domain and checks if there is any abstract interleaving that results in violation of the safety constraint. If none, it returns the current program. Otherwise, there exists a counter-example interleaving that violates the assertion and AGS has two choices: either reﬁne the abstraction (parity to interval, interval to octagon etc.) or modify the program by adding synchronization such that this interleaving is disallowed. The algorithm non-deterministically chooses one (may need to backtrack sometimes) and continues this process until ﬁnding a program that can be veriﬁed given the abstraction. For the simple example, a sample run of the algorithm is shown in Figure 2.15.

36

Applications

T1 parity x += z; x += z; T2 z++; z++; T3 y1 = f(x); y2 = x; assert (y1 != y2)

T1 parity x += z; x += z; T2 z++; z++; T3 y1 = f(x); y2 = x; assert (y1 != y2)
T1 interval x += z; x += z; T2 z++; z++; T3 y1 = f(x); y2 = x; assert (y1 != y2)

T1 parity x += z; x += z; T2 z++; z++; T3 y1 = f(x); y2 = x; assert (y1 != y2)

T1

interval

x += z;

x += z;

T2

z++;

z++;

T3

y1 = f(x);

y2 = x;

assert (y1 != y2)

Figure 2.15: A sample run of the AGS algorithm on the example problem in Figure 2.14.

3
General Principles

3.1 Second-Order Problem Reduction

Program synthesis is a second-order search problem, where the goal is

to discover a function that satisﬁes a given speciﬁcation. Clearly, this is

an undecidable problem in general. If we can reduce this second-order

search problem to a ﬁrst-order search problem, we can leverage oﬀ-the-

shelf constraint solvers that can deal with ﬁrst-order constraints. One

approach to doing that is via use of templates, which are hints about

the syntactic structure of the artifact to be discovered [135]. The syn-

thesis task thus reduces to searching for the missing components in the

template. The templates act as an expressive yet accessible mechanism

for the programmer to express their insight since the programmer’s

task is now limited to simply specifying the high-level structure without

worrying about the low level details.

As an example, consider the task of drawing a pixelated line, approx-

imating a real line, between coordinates points (0, 0) and (X, Y ), say in

the top-right quadrant. The desired program is expected to generate

(x, y) for the pixelated line such that the output values should not

deviate more than half a pixel away from the real value, i.e., we need

|y

−

YX x|

≤

1 2

for

any

(x, y).

This

property

is

captured

formally

using

37

38 (a)

General Principles (b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3.1: (b) shows the inductive loop invariant to establish correctness of Bresenhams code in (d). Both (b) and (d) can be synthesized from the templatized Bresenhams code in (c) and the speciﬁcation in (a).

the notFar predicate in Figure 3.1(b). The programmer may specify the program template shown in Figure 3.1(c) the involves a loop with an unknown loop body and some unknown initialization.
While it is obvious that the statements will involve updates to x and y, the insight for using an auxiliary variable v1 may not immediately occur to the programmer. The programmer may add that in a template reﬁnment step after the synthesizer fails to return a solution. It turns out that this extra variable v1 is used by the program as a measure of the error variable between the discrete line and the real line as shown in the synthesized program in Figure 3.1(d).
The template-based program synthesis approach builds on top of the template-based program veriﬁcation approach [133]. The latter attempts to ﬁnd a inductive proof of correctness, given a program and the pre/postcondition pair. For instance, such techniques can automatically synthesize the inductive invariant in Figure 3.1(b), given the program in Figure 3.1(d) and an appropriate template for the inductive invariant. It turns out that this veriﬁcation methodology extends to the more general

3.2. Oracle-Guided Synthesis

39

synthesis setting where the program statements are also abstracted away via templates as shown in Figure 3.1(c).
Templates are quite similar to sketches in the Sketch system [132], discussed in §3.3.1. However, there are two key diﬀerences. Sketch synthesizes integers that are bounded for each hole, while program templates contain holes that are arbitrary expressions and predicates, and therefore the synthesizer needs to generate values that are potentially unbounded. Secondly, Sketch only has the notion of partial programs and ensures only bounded veriﬁcation, while templates ﬁt well with an underlying template-based full veriﬁcation methodology that allows speciﬁcation of partial invariants as well.

3.2 Oracle-Guided Synthesis

Templates work well for reducing complexity of program synthesis, when they are straightforward to compose. In most cases, however, relevant domain-speciﬁc templates are unavailable. For such situations, the community has adopted an alternative simple approach to program synthesis. It is based on the following observation: while synthesizing a program that satisﬁes a given property is a second-order problem that may be infeasible, verifying if a given program satisﬁes that property is a ﬁrst-order problem, and typically more straightforward [132].
Consider the task of ﬁnding a maximum number m in a list . Formally, synthesizing a program Pmax that solves this task can be described by the following speciﬁcation:

∃Pmax ∀ , m : Pmax( ) = m =⇒ (m ∈ ) ∧ (∀x ∈ : m ≥ x) (3.1)

This is a second-order formula. Suppose now that we have a candidate program Pmax. Validating that Pmax does, in fact, solve the task is equivalent to validating the following formula:

∀ , m : Pmax( ) = m =⇒ (m ∈ ) ∧ (∀x ∈ : m ≥ x)

(3.2)

Instead of proving Equation 3.2 we can disprove its negation:

∃ , m : (Pmax( ) = m) ∧ (m ∈ ∨ ∃x ∈ : m < x)

(3.3)

40

General Principles

Equation 3.3 is a ﬁrst-order formula.1 If it is unsatisﬁable, then Pmax is a valid solution to the original problem. If it is satisﬁable, then a speciﬁc binding of and m constitutes a counterexample. If we take this counterexample ( , m) into account during our subsequent search, then our new candidate programs must not return m on an input – thus we have strengthened the speciﬁcation, eliminating the previous incorrect candidate Pmax.
Furthermore, we can reformulate our veriﬁcation procedure to produce a constructive counterexample – an input together with the corresponding correct output m∗.

∃ , m∗ : (Pmax( ) = m∗) ∧ (m∗ ∈ ) ∧ (∀x ∈ : m∗ ≥ x)

(3.4)

If Equation 3.4 is satisﬁable, it produces a input-output pair ( , m∗) that our desired program must satisfy. In contrast, Equation 3.3 produces an input-output pair ( , m) that the desired program must not satisfy, which is a much weaker constraint. Note that such reformulation is only possible when only one correct output can satisfy the speciﬁcation.
Observation above leads us to the architecture called counterexampleguided inductive synthesis (CEGIS), shown in Figure 3.2. In CEGIS, we split the synthesis problem into search and veriﬁcation. The ﬁrst component (often called the solver) starts with a simple ﬁrst-order speciﬁcation, which is a simpliﬁed version of the original second-order requirement on the desired program. It produces a program candidate that satisﬁes this simpliﬁed speciﬁcation. The second component (often called the veriﬁer) validates that this program candidate satisﬁes the original speciﬁcation. If it does not, the veriﬁer produces a counterexample, which is returned back to the solver. The solver adds it to the speciﬁcation and repeats its search, looking for a new program candidate that, in addition, satisﬁes this counterexample. This process repeats in iterations until either (a) the veriﬁer accepts some program candidate – that is, we have found a program that satisﬁes the entire second-order speciﬁcation, or (b) the solver cannot ﬁnd a candidate that is consistent with its current speciﬁcation – that is, the original problem is unsolvable.

1Apparently nested existential quantiﬁers can in fact be ﬂattened into one because is a ﬁnite list of numbers.

3.2. Oracle-Guided Synthesis Search space

41 Speciﬁcation φ

Solver (search component)

Candidate program P Counterexample x−

Veriﬁer (validation component)

 Fail

Success

Figure 3.2: Counterexample-guided inductive synthesis.

CEGIS was introduced by Solar-Lezama in his dissertation for Sketch [132] (covered in more detail in §3.3.1). Later, Jha and Seshia generalized the principle to oracle-guided inductive synthesis (OGIS) [58]. In OGIS, the solver ﬁrst searches for a program candidate using a simpliﬁed speciﬁcation (as described above), and then consults an oracle regarding validity of this candidate. Diﬀerent ﬂavors of OGIS use diﬀerent kinds of oracles. CEGIS, the most popular variant of OGIS, requires a correctness oracle: for a given candidate program P , the oracle may return “YES” if P satisﬁes the required speciﬁcation φ, or (“NO”, x−) if P does not satisfy φ and x− is a counterexample – an input to P on which it violates φ. Other useful oracle queries have been studied in the literature; the most interesting one, the distinguishing input oracle, is covered in more detail in §3.2.1.
3.2.1 Distinguishing Inputs
The idea of distinguishing inputs has been ﬁrst presented by Jha et al. in 2010 [59]. In this work, the goal is to automatically synthesize loopfree programs from a library of basic components that satisfy a given speciﬁcation. Such a procedure is useful in multiple domains, including bitvector manipulation and function deobfuscation, studied in the paper.
The problem deﬁnition assumes the existence of a complete but expensive validation oracle. It takes as input a candidate program P and veriﬁes whether it satisﬁes the speciﬁcation. Depending on the domain

42

General Principles

and the speciﬁcation, writing such an oracle may be a challenging task. For instance, if the speciﬁcation is given by an alternative ineﬃcient implementation Pφ, we can run a program equivalence tool on P and Pφ to detect whether they behave identically on all possible inputs. However, program equivalence in a general case is undecidable. In general, the best validation oracle for most domains and speciﬁcations tends be the user, who can inspect the candidate program P manually. Obviously, this approach prevents us from querying the validation oracle automatically during synthesis often and in a scalable way.
To avoid querying the validation oracle, Jha et al. reformulate the problem in terms of program distinguishability on concrete inputs. Instead of a validation oracle, they require an I/O oracle that can produce a valid program output on an arbitrary given input. They then reduce the problem using these key observations:
1. If a program P is consistent with a speciﬁcation φ, it must be consistent with any input/output pairs (i1, o1), · · · , (in, on) produced by the I/O oracle.
2. Let P be an incorrect program that is consistent with n input/output pairs (i1, o1), · · · , (in, on) produced by the I/O oracle. If there exists a correct program P ∗, then P and P ∗ should produce the same outputs on all inputs i1, · · · , in but they should produce diﬀerent outputs on some other input i∗.
Observation Item 1 tells us that a program that is consistent with a ﬁnite number of valid input/output pairs is a good candidate for a program that may be consistent with the entire speciﬁcation φ. Observation Item 2 tells us that an incorrect candidate that happens to be consistent with a chosen set of inputs can be detected by extending the set with a new distinguishing input. That input yields diﬀerent behavior for the current candidate program P and some other possible candidate P ∗ (which is still consistent with the previous inputs). If such input does not exist, then all programs that are consistent with the chosen set of inputs are semantically equivalent – they produce the same outputs on all inputs. Thus, either any such candidate is correct (which can be veriﬁed with a single call to the validation oracle), or a correct program

3.2. Oracle-Guided Synthesis

43

function CBSynthesis(I/O oracle I, validation oracle V, components L) Set of examples E ← {i0, I(i0)} // Initialize E with an arbitrary input loop I/O constraint ψE ← BuildIOConstraint(E, L) Candidate program P ← SAT(ψE) if P = ⊥ then return “Components L are insuﬃcient to satisfy the spec.”
Distinguishing constraint ψP ← BuildDistConstraint(E, P ) Distinguishing input i∗ ← SAT(ψP ) if i∗ = ⊥ then
if V(P ) then return P else return “Components L are insuﬃcient to satisfy the spec.” E ← E ∪ {i∗, I(i∗)}
Figure 3.3: The learning procedure of Jha et al. [59]. The I/O constraint ψE constructs a program that is consistent with the current set of input/output pairs E. The distinguishing constraint ψP constructs an input i∗ that yields diﬀerent behavior for the current candidate program P and some other program P ∗ that is consistent with E. For ﬁnite domains, CBSynthesis either terminates with a semantically unique solution or reports that components L are insuﬃcient to build one.

cannot be constructed from given components. The ﬁnal procedure is summarized at a high level in Figure 3.3.
It turns out that for the bitvector domain, even with a random choice of distinguishing inputs, this procedure converges to a semantically unique program in at most 25 steps [59]. More generally, the number of iterations depends on the chosen distinguishing inputs. They split the search space for the programs more or less aggressively, depending on the number of collisions that diﬀerent operators yield on these inputs. This property surfaces in many settings; for example, when replacing an SMT solver with random sampling to discover distinguishing inputs faster. In the bitvector domain, most common operators are more inﬂuenced by rightmost bits of the input [145, Chapter 2]. This suggests that sampling inputs with a bias for more variety in rightmost bits should discover distinguishing inputs faster, which was conﬁrmed by Jha et al. experimentally.
Godefroid and Taly took this idea further in their automated synthesis of symbolic instruction encodings [38]. They determined that for a given subset of candidate functions, there exists a subset of universal

44

General Principles

distinguishing inputs—a set that is a priori guaranteed to distinguish any two functions from the subset. Moreover, they have designed the templates (function subsets) and corresponding universal distinguishing inputs that cover 534 instructions of Intel x86 ALU. The domain here is the same bitvector operations as in the work of Jha et al., but without a veriﬁcation oracle.

End-user conﬁdence Distinguishing inputs are useful not only from a technical perspective as a tool for speeding up synthesis. They also play an important role as a medium for communication with the user. Consider a program synthesis system that is exposed to a user, who iteratively introduces constraints on the synthesis task. At each round, the system presents the user with a candidate program, which satisﬁes the constraints accumulated so far. Ultimately, the user here acts as a veriﬁcation oracle: she needs to determine when the current program satisﬁes her overall intent and does not require adding more constraints to synthesize a better program. However, in some cases such a veriﬁcation may be cumbersome or even impossible for the user. In such cases, the system may help her with interactive feedback, suggesting ways to validate that the current candidate program is unambiguous. Distinguishing inputs is one such possible feedback.
Mayer et al. introduced this idea in their FlashProg system, and called it conversational clariﬁcation. FlashProg is a system for programming by examples – a subﬁeld of program synthesis where speciﬁcation is provided by the means of inputs-ouput examples (Chapter 7). Programming by examples has been applied to many diﬀerent domains; in FlashProg, the chosen one is data wrangling (§2.1). In this domain, the user is trying to extract some information from a semi-structured text ﬁle by the means of providing examples of extracted data, and the system is synthesizing an extraction script in the underlying DSL. In such a setting, verifying the validity of a candidate extraction script is tedious: it requires verifying the entire extracted dataset and matching it against the input ﬁle.
To alleviate the veriﬁcation workload, FlashProg automatically detects when the current candidate program is ambiguous. It examines

3.3. Syntactic Bias

45

alternative programs in the DSL that are consistent with the current examples, runs them on the entire input document, and detects any discrepancies in their output. A discrepancy between the outputs of a candidate program and its alternative suggests a location in the input document that serves as a distinguishing input. FlashProg then proactively asks the user a question: “Should the extracted output in this location be X, Y , or something else?” Such proactive clariﬁcation points the user to sources of ambiguity, allowing her to quickly ﬁnd errors in the output and increasing her conﬁdence in the ﬁnal result.

3.3 Syntactic Bias
As outlined in §1.3, one of the key ideas to scaling up modern program synthesis is syntactically restricting the space of possible programs. This syntactic bias can be expressed by various means such as a partial program sketch, a grammar, or a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL). In this subsection, we introduce these common means, and discuss practical design considerations for a tractable and usable DSL.
3.3.1 Sketching
Sketch [132] is a synthesis system that allows programmers to provide insights through a partial program called sketch, which expresses the high-level structure of the intended implementation but leaves holes for low-level implementation details. The Sketch synthesizer ﬁlls up these holes from a ﬁnite set of choices such that the completed program satisﬁes the provided speciﬁcation using the CEGIS algorithm. The main idea in using sketches is to make synthesis accessible to programmers as they can provide insights easily using the programming model formalism they already know without having to learn other formalism such as speciﬁcation languages or theorem proving.
The syntax for the Sketch language is quite similar to a language like C with only one additional feature – a symbol ?? that represent an unknown constant integer value. A simple example sketch is shown in Figure 3.4. The sketch represents a partial program with an unknown integer h and a simple assertion. The harness keyword indicates to the

46

General Principles

1 harness void tripleSketch(int x) {

2

int h = ??; // hole for unknown constant

3

assert h * x == x + x + x;

4}

Figure 3.4: A simple sketch for computing three times an input value x.

1 int tripleSketch(int x) implements tripleRef {

2

int h = ??; // hole for unknown constant

3

return h * x;

4}

6 int tripleRef(int y) {

7

return y + y + y;

8}

Figure 3.5: A simple sketch with reference implementation sketch.

synthesizer that it should compute a value for h such that the assertion is satisﬁed for all input values x. For this example, the Sketch synthesizer computes the value h = 3 as expected.
In addition to assertions, another mechanism to write desired speciﬁcation in Sketch is to provide a reference implementation. The simple example sketch from Figure 3.4 can be equivalently rewritten with a reference implementation speciﬁcation as shown in Figure 3.5. The implements keyword speciﬁes the synthesizer to compute the values for holes such that completed sketch program has the same functional behavior as the reference implementation.
These unknown integers can be used to specify a hypothesis space over a richer class of expressions in the sketches. For example, the sketch in Figure 3.6 uses an integer hole to deﬁne a space of ﬁve diﬀerent binary operator expressions over two integer values lhs and rhs. The Sketch language also provides a succinct language construct to specify such expression choices: lhs {| + | - | * | / | % |} rhs.
The Sketch language also supports a generator function construct to specify a hypothesis space of possible code fragments that can be used to complete sketches. The generator functions can be used in

3.3. Syntactic Bias

47

1 int chooseBinOp(int lhs, int rhs) {

2

int h = ??;

3

assert h < 5;

5 6 7 8 9 10 }

if (h == 0) return lhs + rhs; if (h == 1) return lhs - rhs; if (h == 2) return lhs * rhs; if (h == 3) return lhs / rhs; if (h == 4) return lhs % rhs;

Figure 3.6: Using holes to encode the space of richer expressions.

1 generator int linexp(int x, int y) {

2

return ?? * x + ?? * y;

3}

5 harness void main(int x, int y) {

6

assert linexp(x, y) == x + x + y;

7

assert linexp(x, y) == x + y + y;

8}

Figure 3.7: A sketch using a generator function.

the same way as a function, but the key diﬀerence between them and functions is that every call to a generator will be replaced by a concrete piece of code deﬁned by the generator and the generator function can produce diﬀerent code fragments for diﬀerent calls. For example, consider the following sketch in Figure 3.7 with a generator function for linear expressions (linexp). The result of running the synthesizer on this sketch is shown in Figure 3.8.
The main expressive power of generator functions comes from their ability to recursively deﬁne a large space of expressions succinctly. For example, Figure 3.9 shows a recursive generator function deﬁning a context-free grammar of possible expressions over two variables.
The Sketch language supports several other advanced features such as function closures, higher order functions, and algebraic data

48

General Principles

1 void main(int x, int y) {

2

assert (((2 * x) + y) == ((x + x) + y));

3

assert ((x + (2 * y)) == ((x + y) + y));

4}

Figure 3.8: The result of running the Sketch synthesizer on the sketch in Figure 3.7.

1 generator int recGen(int x, int y) {

2

int h = ??;

3

if (h == 0) return x;

4

if (h == 1) return y;

5

int a = recGen(x, y);

6

int b = recGen(x, y);

7

if (h == 2) return a + b;

8

if (h == 3) return a - b;

9

if (h == 4) return a * b;

10

if (h == 5) return a / b;

11 }

12 void main(int x, int y) {

13

assert recGen(x, y) == (x + y) * (y - x);

14 }

Figure 3.9: The result of running the Sketch synthesizer on the sketch in Figure 3.7.

types. A more detailed description about the language and diﬀerent features can be found in the Sketch language manual.2

3.3.2 Syntax-Guided Synthesis
Syntax-Guided Synthesis [3] is a recent community eﬀort towards formalizing the problem of program synthesis where the logical speciﬁcation is supplemented with a user-provided syntactic template to constrain the hypothesis space of possible programs. The input to the syntax-guided synthesis problem (SyGuS) consists of a background theory T that deﬁnes the vocabulary and interpretation of function and relation symbols, a semantic correctness speciﬁcation for the desired program given by a logical formula φ, and a syntactic set of candidate implementations
2https://people.csail.mit.edu/asolar/manual.pdf

3.3. Syntactic Bias

49

1 ; set the background theory to LIA 2 (set-logic LIA)

4 ; grammar for max2 candidate implementations

5 (synth-fun max2 ((x Int) (y Int)) Int

6

((Start Int (x y 0 1

7

(+ Start Start)

8

(- Start Start)

9

(ite StartBool Start Start)))

10

(StartBool Bool ((and StartBool StartBool)

11

(or StartBool StartBool)

12

(not StartBool)

13

(<= Start Start)

14

(= Start Start)

15

(>= Start Start)))))

17 ; universally quantified input variables x and y 18 (declare-var x Int) 19 (declare-var y Int)

21 ; correctness constraints on the max2 function 22 (constraint (>= (max2 x y) x)) 23 (constraint (>= (max2 x y) y)) 24 (constraint (or (= x (max2 x y)) (= y (max2 x y))))

26 ; synthesize command 27 (check-synth)

Figure 3.10: The SyGuS formulation for the max function over two variables.

given by a context-free grammar G. The computation problem then is to ﬁnd an implementation from the set of candidate implementations (i.e. a derivation in the grammar G) such that the implementation satisﬁes the speciﬁcation φ in the given theory T .
As an example, consider the problem of synthesizing a max2 function that computes the maximum value of two given values x and y. The SyGuS formulation of the problem is shown in Figure 3.10. The encoding ﬁrst deﬁnes the background theory of Linear Integer Arithmetic (LIA), where each variable is either a Boolean or an in-

50

General Principles

teger, and the vocabulary consists of Boolean and integer constants, addition, comparisons, and conditionals. The grammar for the unknown function max2 deﬁnes the type signature of the function and the space of possible candidate implementations. The grammar in the example corresponds to if-then-else expressions (ite) and linear expressions with additions and subtractions over the terminal values x, y, 0, and 1. The correctness speciﬁcation deﬁnes the following logical constraint φ1 ∧ φ2, where φ1 ≡ max2(x,y) ≥ x ∧ max2(x,y) ≥ y, and φ2 ≡ max2(x,y) = x ∨ max2(x,y) = y. Given this formulation, one candidate implementation from the grammar that satisﬁes the speciﬁcation is (ite (>= x y) x y).
The SyGuS eﬀort has resulted in a community eﬀort in collecting benchmarks from various synthesis domains into a common format. It has also lead to SyGuS-Comp, an annual synthesis competition, that allows solvers to compete on a collection of benchmarks. In the 2015 competition, 8 diﬀerent solvers competed in three tracks corresponding to LIA (Conditional Linear Integer arithmetic track), INV (invariant generation track), and General (General SyGuS track) [5]. The SyGuS solvers employed various solving techniques including enumerative search, stochastic search, constraint-based search, machine learning, etc.
3.3.3 DSL Design
The choice of a domain-speciﬁc language is inspired by several factors.
Balanced Expressivity: On one hand, the DSL should be expressive enough to represent a wide variety of tasks in the underlying task domain. On the other hand, it should be restricted enough to allow eﬃcient search.
Choice of Operators: The DSL should be made up of operators that allow eﬃcient reasoning. For instance, the operators should have small inverses to enable a top-down deductive search strategy (§7.3) to be eﬃcient.
Naturalness: The programs in the DSL should involve natural computational patterns that can be easily understood by the users.

3.3. Syntactic Bias

51

This can increase user’s conﬁdence in the system. In fact, these computational patterns should be similar to how programmers might have written the code themselves. These programs might be read by users, who might then select between these programs, edit them, and even use them as part of larger workﬂows.
Eﬃciency: The operators in the DSL should have eﬃcient implementations. This is important if the synthesized program is expected to be run in a tight loop over large number of inputs.
The synthesis designer can select an existing DSL or its subset that meets the desired constraints. For instance, Cheung et.al. [22] leveraged a subset of the SQL DSL when synthesizing optimized database-backed applications. Recently, Panchekha and Torlak leveraged a subset of the CSS language [103] for synthesizing non-trivial spreadsheet styles from layout constraints. However, in other cases, new DSLs might need to be designed. An approach to designing an appropriate DSL is to ﬁrst manually write down programs for a variety of tasks in the underlying task domain and then identify common patterns/templates for inclusion in the DSL. Designing a good DSL is often the ﬁrst non-trivial idea in developing a good program synthesizer. We next discuss such ideas behind some non-trivial DSLs from the data wrangling domain.
Flash Fill DSL The Flash Fill DSL for syntactic string transformations [43] contains programs that take an n-ary tuple of strings as input and return a string as output. These programs involve computing substrings of the strings in the input tuple, and then concatenating them appropriately along with some constant strings. There is also support for restricted forms of loops that concatenate a sequence of substrings from the input string (with the same delimited constant string) to facilitate more sophisticated string transformations as in abbreviation computation or string reversal. The Flash Fill programs can contain conditionals at the very top level to allow for diﬀerent transformations for diﬀerent kinds of data formats—this feature is useful for normalizing strings that may come in multiple formats. Consider, for instance, the task shown in Figure 2.1. The synthesized program extracts the

52

General Principles

ﬁrst two words from the input string, converts them to lowercase, and concatenates them separated by a space character.
The most interesting aspect of the Flash Fill DSL is the design of its substring construct that takes as input a string s and two position expressions in that string, and evaluates to the substring between those positions. A position expression can either be a constant oﬀset (from the start or end of the string s) or is a Pos(s, r1, r2, k) construct denoting the kth occurrence of a position p such that (some suﬃx of the part of the string s on) the left side of p matches with r1 and (some preﬁx of the part of the string s on) the right side of p matches with r2. Consider the expression e = Substring(s, p, p ), where p = Pos(s, r1, r2, k) and p = Pos(x, r1, r2, k ). When r1 = r2 = , then e describes a constraint over the substring to be extracted. When r2 = r1 = , then e describes a constraint over the context around the substring to be extracted. The general case is even more expressive allowing constraints over both the substring to be extracted and its context with use of simple (and hence eﬃciently learnable) regular expressions. For instance, if p = Pos(s, , W ord, 2) and p2 = Pos(s, W ord, , 2), then e describes the second word in string s. If p1 = Pos(s, [ , , 1) and p2 = Pos(s, , ] , 1), then e describes the content within the (ﬁrst occurrence of opening and closing) brackets.
The Flash Fill DSL has been extended to allow semantic string transformations that involve lookup operations into some background tables [127]. This is done in a tightly integrated manner with the rest of the language by taking substrings of the input strings, using them to index into the key columns of a table and read a value from some other column, and then further treating that value as another input string for any subsequent computation.

FlashExtract DSL The FlashExtract DSL [78] contains programs that take a large string (representing a semi-structured text/log ﬁle) and a data structure deﬁnition (composed of nested structure and sequence constructs) and returns an instance of that data structure. Each program is composed of multiple sub-programs whose data-ﬂow dependence follows the data structure deﬁnition. There are two kinds of

3.4. Optimization

53

sub-programs: One that generates a substring of a given input string, and the other that generates a list of substrings of a given input string. The latter involves splitting the input string into a list of lines, ﬁltering the result, and then mapping it to another list using a substring operator.
FlashRelate DSL The FlashRelate DSL contains programs that take a two-dimensional array (representing a semi-structured spreadsheet) as input and return a list of n-ary tuples (representing a relational table) as output [10]. These programs extract one of the output columns via a ﬁlter operation over cells of the two-dimensional input array, while other output columns are extracted as map operations over cells of an already extracted column. The ﬁlter and map operations employ spatial constraints over cells of the two-dimensional array in addition to regular expression based constraints over values in those cells. Consider, for instance, the task in Figure 2.5. The synthesized program computes the Harvest column via a ﬁlter operation that identiﬁes all non-empty cells that are located vertically below any cell with string content “value”. The Date column is computed via a map operation (over cells of the input array whose content appears in the Harvest column) that picks the cell on the immediate right. The Country column is computed via a map operation that picks the ﬁrst cell on the left side containing alphabetic content.
3.4 Optimization
A basic formulation of the program synthesis problem asks to ﬁnd any program P in an underlying space L (e.g. a DSL) that satisﬁes a spec φ. However, in many settings we are interested not just in any program, but in the best program according to some cost function. This is known as ranking or optimization in synthesis. Some interesting cost functions that arise in practice are:
Program speed. This is the default choice in superoptimization (§2.6).
Robustness. This is the default setting in programming by examples (Chapter 7) for data wrangling (§2.1), where a program is learned

54

General Principles

on a small selection of input data, but it should be applicable on the rest of yet-unseen user data. In other words, learning should not overﬁt to provided input-output examples.
“Naturalness” or “readability”. This is a measure of a program being acceptable to a developer. For instance, this cost function may take into account common idioms in an underlying language. The notion of idioms may be exploited explicitly, either by mining them from a corpus of source code [2], or by delegating ranking to a search engine [151].

Program AST size is often used as an approximation to all aforementioned cost functions. Arguably, a smaller program is more readable, a smaller program may be faster, and a smaller program may be more generally applicable. However, it is not always the case. For instance, a constant program has size 1 but it is not robust: it outputs the same value on all inputs. As another example, on certain Intel x86 microarchitectures the inc instruction may be slower than add 1, despite being shorter and more speciﬁc.
Ranking in program synthesis has been approached with many diﬀerent techniques, including Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (explained in detail in §6.1 and 6.2), version space algebras (§7.2), machine learning (§6.3 and 7.4.1), and metasketches [15].

Markov Chain Monte Carlo MCMC techniques in program synthesis employ a variation of genetic programming, where Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is used to explore a search space of possible programs. In MCMC sampling, we aim to draw programs from the space with probability proportional to their cost. In the limit, the most frequently sampled program will be the global optimum on the cost function; in practice, running an MCMC sampling process for a reasonable amount of time usually discovers a “suﬃciently good” local optimum. In a sense, Metropolis-Hastings algorithm can be viewed as a “smart” hill climbing algorithm that is resilient to getting stuck at local optima and only limited by its time budget [123].

3.4. Optimization

55

Version Space Algebras Version Space Algebras (VSAs) oﬀer a succinct representation of the program space that is amenable to structurebased ranking [113]. Assuming a monotonic cost function h(P ), 3 the problem of ﬁnding the topmost program in a VSA is solvable with a beam search through the VSA structure, which constructs the desired program from its subexpressions, bottom-up.
Machine Learning Machine Learning methods have been used extensively for program synthesis and optimization. Their applications include automatically learning cost functions [7, 128], dealing with noise in the speciﬁcation [115], and even end-to-end program synthesis [40, 64, 76, 98, 105, 118]. We describe some of these applications in §6.3 and 7.4.1.
Metasketches A metasketch [15] is a generalization of a sketch (§3.3.1). Instead of a single partial program, it gives an ordered family of such partial programs, along with a cost function and a gradient, which suggests which sketches in the family may contain a program with a lower cost. In other words, it describes a search space as a family of ﬁnite sub-spaces that can be explored independently, and provides guiding functions to navigate these sub-spaces in a cost-eﬀective way. Using this formulation, Bornholt et al. present an optimal synthesis algorithm, which explores multiple local sub-spaces independently in parallel using CEGIS, and coordinates their ﬁndings using a separate global component to guide the search toward more optimal programs.

3A cost function h(P ) is called monotonic over the program structure, if bettervalued subexpressions w.r.t. h lead to better-valued expressions w.r.t. h:
h(P1) ≥ h(P2) ⇒ h(F [P1]) ≥ h(F [P2])
where F is any DSL operator (straightforwardly generalizable to arbitrary arity).

4
Enumerative Search
Enumerative search based synthesis techniques have proven to be one of the most eﬀective techniques for synthesizing small programs in rich complex hypothesis spaces. Smart pruning techniques in enumerative search have resulted in synthesizers that won the recent ICFP program synthesis competition [1] and the SyGuS competition [6]. The key idea in enumerative techniques is to ﬁrst structure the hypothesis space using some program metrics such as program size, complexity etc., and then enumerate programs in the space with pruning to eﬃciently search for a program that satisﬁes the speciﬁcation. The enumerative algorithms are typically designed to be semi-decidable for the inﬁnite hypothesis spaces, but they are generally applicable for almost all kinds of hypothesis spaces and speciﬁcation constraints.
4.1 Enumerative Search
We now describe a simple enumerative synthesis algorithm for hypothesis spaces that are deﬁned using a CFG (similar to SyGuS [3]), but the algorithm can be easily extended to other forms of hypothesis spaces such as partial programs, context-sensitive languages etc. Let the hypothesis
57

58

Enumerative Search

S → x | y | (S + S) | (S - S) | if(B,S,S) B → (S ≤ S) | (S = S) | (S ≥ S)
Figure 4.1: A simple context-free grammar for deﬁning a space of conditional linear integer arithmetic expressions.

space be deﬁned by a context-free grammar G = (V, Σ, R, S), where V denotes the set of non-terminals in the grammar, Σ denotes a ﬁnite set of terminals including constants and program variables, R denotes a ﬁnite relation from V to (V ∪ Σ)∗ corresponding to the grammar production rules, and S denotes the start symbol. For example, a simple grammar for deﬁning the hypothesis space of a set of conditional linear arithmetic expressions is shown in Figure 4.1, where V = {S, B}, Σ = {x, y, +, −, if, (, ), ≤, =, ≥}, S = {S}, and the relation R corresponds to the 8 relations shown in the ﬁgure.
The derivations (programs) in the grammar G can be enumerated either in a top-down or a bottom-up fashion to ﬁnd a derivation that is consistent with the given speciﬁcation.
4.1.1 Top-down Tree search
A simple top-down enumerative algorithm for searching over programs that satisfy a speciﬁcation φ in a hypothesis space deﬁned by a grammar G is shown in Figure 4.2. The algorithm enumerates the derivations in the grammar and maintains an ordered list of partial derivations P in a top-down manner starting from the start symbol S. In each iteration, it selects the ﬁrst derivation p from the set P using the RemoveFirst() function and checks whether p satisﬁes the given speciﬁcation φ. If yes, the algorithm returns p as the desired program. Otherwise, the algorithm computes the set of all non-terminal nodes α in the partial derivation that can be expanded and ranks them using a pre-deﬁned RankNonTerminal function. It then considers each non-terminal α in an ordered fashion and computes the set of possible production rules β for expanding α. The algorithm searches over the set of production rules again in a ranked order (using RankProductionRule function) to compute expanded derivations p where the non-terminal node α is

4.1. Enumerative Search

59

function EnumTopDownSearch(grammar G, spec φ) P ← [S] // An ordered list of partial derivations in G Pv ← {S} // A set of programs while P = ∅ do p ← RemoveFirst(P ) if φ(p) then // Speciﬁcation φ is satisﬁed return p
α ← NonTerminals(p) foreach α ∈ RankNonTerminals(α, φ) do
β ← {β|(α, β) ∈ R} foreach β ∈ RankProductionRule(β, φ) do
p ← p[α → β] if ¬Subsumed(p , Pv, φ) then
P .Insert(p ) Pv ← Pv ∪ p
Figure 4.2: A simple top-down enumeration algorithm to search for a derivation p in a hypothesis space deﬁned by a CFG G that satisﬁes a given speciﬁcation φ.

replaced by β. Finally, the algorithm prunes the search space by avoiding adding newly expanded programs p if p is already subsumed by some program in PV that has previously been considered by the algorithm. The algorithm iteratively continues until it ﬁnds a program p satisfying the speciﬁcation. This algorithm is also typically provided with an additional bound for the maximum size of the program derivations, which is used to terminate the search.
Consider the grammar for conditional linear integer arithmetic in Figure 4.1 (without the subtraction operator for brevity), and let the speciﬁcation φ be provided as the following input-output examples : φ ≡ {(x = 0, y = 1, f (x, y) = 1), (x = 1, y = 2, f (x, y) = 3)}, where f denotes the unknown function to be synthesized. A possible function f that satisﬁes the speciﬁcation is f (x, y) = x + y. An example run of the top-down enumerative algorithm is shown in Figure 4.3, with a simple ranking function that prefers expressions with fewer number of non-terminals. Note that the subsumption check can help prune the search by disallowing programs such as S1 + x to be added to P if x + S2 is already present in Pv.

60

Enumerative Search

P [S] [x, y, S1 + S2, if(B, S1, S2)] [y, S1 + S2, if(B, S1, S2)] [S1 + S2, if(B, S1, S2)]
[x + S2, y + S2, · · · ] [x + x, x + y, · · · ] [x + y, · · · ]

p S x y S1 + S2
x + S2 x+x x+y

α [S] ⊥ ⊥ [S1, S2]
S2 ⊥

β
[x, y, S1 + S2, if(B, S1, S2)]
⊥ ⊥ [x + S2, y + S2,
S3 + S4 + S2, if(B2, S3, S4) + S2, S1 + x, S1 + y, S1 + S3 + S4, S1 + if(B2, S3, S4)] [x + x, x + y, x + S5 + S6, . . . ] ⊥

Figure 4.3: An example run of the top-down enumerative search algorithm on the addition of two numbers x and y.

4.1.2 Bottom-up Tree-search
The bottom-up tree search approach caches the results of intermediate programs constructed during the search to prune a redundant family of programs. Speciﬁcally, if two derivations (programs) p and p are equivalent with respect to the speciﬁcation φ, then only one of them needs to be considered during the search. For the top-down algorithm shown in Figure 4.2, this check is performed inside the Subsumed function to avoid adding a derivation p to the set of derivations P . This optimization does not greatly reduce the search space in the top-down enumerative strategy because of a limitation that only full derivations can be evaluated for equivalence. However, it can have a dramatic eﬀect on a bottom-down search technique [4, 141], which we describe below.
A simple bottom-up enumerative algorithm is shown in Figure 4.4. The algorithm ﬁrst starts building a set of leaf expressions in the grammar G in the order of their size progSize. It then incrementally builds the set of candidate expressions E using the smaller expressions to ﬁnd one that satisﬁes the speciﬁcation. The key idea in this algorithm is to maintain a semantically unique set of expressions E, i.e. no two

4.1. Enumerative Search

61

function EnumBottomUpSearch(grammar G, spec φ) E ← {Φ} // Set of expressions in G progSize ← 1 while True do C ← EnumerateExprs(G, E, progSize) foreach c ∈ C do if φ(c) then // Speciﬁcation φ is satisﬁed return c if ¬∃ e ∈ E : Equiv(e, c, φ) then E.Insert(c) progSize ← progSize + 1
Figure 4.4: A simple bottom-down enumeration algorithm to search for a derivation e in a hypothesis space deﬁned by a CFG G that satisﬁes a given speciﬁcation φ.

expressions e and e in E are functionally equivalent with respect to the speciﬁcation φ. This pruning allows the bottom-up enumeration algorithm to signiﬁcantly decrease the space of expressions that need to be considered before ﬁnding the desired expression.
Consider the grammar for conditional linear integer arithmetic in Figure 4.1 with an additional leaf denoting constant 1 and the speciﬁcation of the unknown function f to be synthesized to be that of the maximum function such that φ : f (x, y) ≥ x∧f (x, y) ≥ y∧(f (x, y) = x ∨ f (x, y) = y). The bottom-up algorithm uses the CEGIS algorithm to incrementally build the input-output examples for the speciﬁcation. Let’s assume the enumeration algorithm ﬁrst starts with a random example of (x = 0, y = 1, f (x, y) = 1). It can construct the expression y as a satisfying expression. The veriﬁer then returns a counter-example (x = 1, y = 0, f (x, y) = 1). Given these two examples, the algorithm constructs the conforming expression 1 and the veriﬁer again returns the counter-example (x = 0, y = 0, f (x, y) = 0). The search algorithm can now return x + y as a conforming expression. Note that during this search since both x + y and y + x are functionally equivalent, only one of these expressions are added to the candidate set for constructing larger expressions. This iteration between the bottom-up search algorithm and the veriﬁer continues until the search algorithm ﬁnds the desired

62

Enumerative Search

Candidate Expressions
x y 1 x+y if(x ≤ y, y, x)

Counter-example from Veriﬁer
(x = 0, y = 1, f (x, y) = 1) (x = 1, y = 1, f (x, y) = 1) (x = 0, y = 0, f (x, y) = 0) (x = 1, y = 1, f (x, y) = 1)
φ

Figure 4.5: An example run of the bottom-up enumerative search algorithm on the maximum of two numbers x and y [3].

expression if(x ≥ y, x, y). An example run of an enumerative solver is shown in Figure 4.5.
4.2 Bidirectional Enumerative Search
The previous enumerative algorithms search for programs that when run on the inputs produce the corresponding outputs, which can also be explained as performing a forward search starting from the inputs (input states) and transforming the states through a series of intermediate states until obtaining the desired output states. This search space of programs grows exponentially with the size (depth) of the programs. In some cases, the search can be performed more eﬃciently with a bidirectional search, where the forward search from the input states is combined with a backward search from the desired output states.
A simple bidirectional enumerative algorithm is shown in Figure 4.6. Given a speciﬁcation φ ≡ (φpre, φpost), where φpre speciﬁes the set of input states and φpost speciﬁes the set of output states, the algorithm maintains two sets of expressions F and B. The set F comprises of expressions derived by performing a forward enumerative search starting from the input states φpre, whereas the set B comprises of expressions derived by performing a backward search starting from the output states φpost. It iteratively builds the two sets in increasing order of program sizes until ﬁnding an expression f ∈ F and b ∈ B such that the states corresponding to f and b can be matched. The resulting program is obtained by combining the two expressions.

4.3. Oﬄine Exhaustive Enumeration and Composition

63

function BidrectionalSearch(grammar G, spec φ ≡ (φpre, φpost)) F ← φ // Set of expressions from Forward search B ← φ // Set of expressions from Backward search progSize ← 1 while ¬∃f ∈ F , b ∈ B : MatchState(f, b) do F ← EnumForwardExprs(G, F , φpre, progSize) B ← EnumBackwardExprs(G, B, φpost, progSize) progSize ← progSize + 1
p ← f ⊕ b, where ∃f ∈ F , b ∈ B : MatchState(f, b) return p
Figure 4.6: A bidirectional enumeration algorithm to search for a derivation p in a hypothesis space deﬁned by a CFG G that satisﬁes a given speciﬁcation φ with inputs satisfying φpre and outputs satisfying φpost.

The bidirectional enumerative search has been used for many synthesis domains including learning programs to solve geometry constructions [48] and scaling up superoptimization of assembly code [109].

4.3 Oﬄine Exhaustive Enumeration and Composition
Another interesting, but resource intensive, enumeration technique is to perform an oﬄine exhaustive enumeration of all programs upto a given size. The programs are then evaluated on a large set of pre-deﬁned inputs to obtain a corresponding mapping function from programs to the inputoutput pairs. Finally, given a set of input-output examples, the programs are retrieved using the mapping function. This strategy has been successfully implemented in systems such as MagicHaskeller [67] and Unagi [1].
The Unagi system won the 2013 ICFP program synthesis competition beating several state-of-the-art program synthesis techniques [1]. Given a DSL of bit-vector programs used in the competition, the Unagi system ﬁrst perform an oﬄine exhaustive enumeration of all expressions in the DSL upto a given size (15 in their case). During enumeration, several pruning techniques were employed to merge equivalent programs. For example, the expression (not (if x (not y) z)) was normalized to (if x y (not z)). After performing the enumeration, each program

64

Enumerative Search

was evaluated on 256 pre-deﬁned input bitvectors to create a mapping from programs to the input-output examples. During the competition, for smaller programs upto size 15, the Unagi system used the direct mapping to quickly ﬁnd the corresponding program.
For enumerating larger programs, Unagi used an incomplete but eﬀective pruning strategy based on input-output equivalence. It prunes expressions that results in the same output on 256 inputs to construct larger programs. In addition, using the training problems, Unagi also learnt several syntactic priors over the space of large programs, e.g. it learnt that the expression trees tend to be unbalanced in the training data and the initial accumulator value for fold problems was always zero. It used these syntactic priors to further guide the exhaustive enumeration.
Finally, to learn even larger programs of size greater than 50, it used a uniﬁcation strategy to decompose the input-output examples to diﬀerent sets. Each set of input-output examples could be solved by a smaller program and then the sets are glued together using if conditions. The Unagi system used 32 threads running independent search strategies and used 3000 hours of compute time on Amazon’s EC2 cloud for the competition. Notably, this technique of uniﬁcation of smaller expressions to learn larger programs was also used by the enumerative synthesis system that won the 2016 SyGuS competition [6].

5
Constraint Solving
Many successful applications of program synthesis rely on some constraint solving technique. In general, constraint solving refers to ﬁnding an instantiation of free variables in a formula (a model) that would make the formula true [37]. The key idea in applying constraint solving to program synthesis is encoding both the speciﬁcation and the syntactic program restrictions in a single formula so that any true model corresponds to a correct program. The encoding should map variables in the formula to choices of subexpressions in the desired program.
We illustrate this idea on a simple example. Consider a small DSL of bitwise operations upon a 8-bit input variable x:
program P ::= plus(E, E) | mul(E, E) | shl(E, C) | shr(E, C) expression E ::= x | C 8-bit constant C ::= 000000002 | 000000012 | 000000102 | . . . | 111111112
Every program in this DSL contains a single top-most binary operation, with each operand being either the input or some 8-bit constant.
In the theory of bitvectors TBV [11], the following formula Φ(hP , hE1, hE2, c1, c2) encodes any program P in this DSL that sat-
65

66

Constraint Solving

isﬁes the spec φ : ∀x P (x) ≥ 0 (as a signed integer).1 In other words, any valid assignment of free variables hP , hE1, hE2, c1, c2 corresponds to a valid program in the DSL.

1 (define-sort Bit8 () (_ BitVec 8)) ; A “8-bit vector” type 2 ; Free variables of Φ 3 (declare-const hP Int) 4 (declare-const hE0 Bool) 5 (declare-const hE1 Bool) 6 (declare-const c0 Bit8) 7 (declare-const c1 Bit8) 8 (assert (and (>= hP 0) (< hP 4)))

10 ; Deﬁnition of P (x)

11 (define-fun prog ((x Bit8)) Bit8

12 (let ((left (ite hE0 c0 x))

13

(right (ite hE1 c1 x)))

14

(ite (= hP 0) (bvadd left right)

15

(ite (= hP 1) (bvmul left right)

16

(ite (= hP 2) (bvshl left c1)

17

(bvlshr left c1))))))

18 ; Spec φ : ∀x P (x) ≥ 0

19 (assert (forall ((x Bit8)) (bvsge (prog x) #x00)))

The variable hP encodes a non-deterministic choice between alternatives for the nonterminal P . It ranges in {0, 1, 2, 3}, which correspond to plus, mul, shl, and shr, respectively. hE1 and hE2 are Boolean variables that encode a similar choice for the nonterminal E used as the ﬁrst or the second operand, respectively. Here true corresponds to C and false to x. Finally, c0 and c1 encode non-deterministic choices for the constants supplied for the left and right operand. If a program uses x instead of a constant for some operand i ∈ {0, 1} (that is, hEi = false for that model of Φ), the value of ci in the model is irrelevant.
One possible satisfying model for Φ is {hP = 3, hE0 = hE1 = false, c1 = 000000012, c0 is irrelevant}. It corresponds to the program P = shr(x, 000000012), which obviously satisﬁes φ for any input.

1For clarity, we display most SMT formulas in this section in SMT-LIB syntax [11].

5.1. Component-Based Synthesis

67

5.1 Component-Based Synthesis
5.1.1 End-to-end SMT Encoding
The ﬁrst constraint-based approaches to program synthesis encoded the language and the spec into SAT/SMT constraints directly, similarly to our example above. A classical example of such an encoding is component-based synthesis by Jha et al. [59]. We introduced this work in §3.2.1 to present the idea of distinguishing inputs. Now, we will discuss their overall encoding of the synthesis problem.
In component-based synthesis, our syntactic bias is a library of allowed components. Each component is a domain-speciﬁc function that may be used in the desired program. Usually, there are no syntactic restrictions on their composition (e.g., no grammar): any type-safe well-formed combination of components constitutes a valid program in the language. Without loss of generality, we assume that every program uses all provided components, each exactly once (multiple uses of a component can be achieved by including multiple copies in the library).
Jha et al. ﬁrst apply their encoding to the domain of bit manipulation programs. In it, there is a single type (a ﬁxed-length bitvector), thus all component usages are a priori type-safe. To solve a synthesis problem, they need to encode, at the minimum, that the desired program
(a) is well-formed, (b) uses all components without violating their respective specs, and (c) is consistent with the provided spec (e.g., input-output examples). In addition, to apply the distinguishing inputs technique (see §3.2.1), they encode in a separate query that the program (d) disagrees with some other consistent program on a new input. We now describe the component-based synthesis constraints (a)-(c).

Well-formedness A loop-free program is well-formed if it forms a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of components and their connections (that is, usages of outputs of one component as inputs in the others). In addition, it must use all components from the library exactly once.
An SMT encoding of well-formedness associates each variable in the program with a single line number where it is deﬁned and assigned.

68

Constraint Solving

For component output variables Oi, this is also the line where the corresponding component fi is used. For component input variables Iij, this is the line that deﬁnes the output variable that is passed as a jth argument to the component fi.2
With this notation, encoding well-formedness reduces to: (a) Ensuring that all line numbers range in their respective domain
bounds (that is, program inputs are assigned in the ﬁrst lines of the program, and all library components are invoked in the following lines). (b) Ensuring consistency: all output variables (and their corresponding line numbers) should be diﬀerent. (c) Ensuring acyclicity: components should only take as input variables that were assigned earlier.

Component usage In the framework of [59], every component fi is annotated with a speciﬁcation φi(Ii, Oi), which describes its semantics and relates its inputs Ii with its output Oi. All these speciﬁcations are appended to the synthesis constraint, with their inputs and outputs mapped to the corresponding variables in the program. To further ensure that the program’s data ﬂow is consistent, we add another constraint that ensures that an output variable retains the same value when it is used as an input to another component.

Speciﬁcation The problem speciﬁcation φ(I, P (I)) relates its output (implicitly taken from the last line of the program) with its inputs. Jha et al. used input-output examples as a speciﬁcation, which are easy to encode in additional clauses appended to the synthesis constraint. In general, any speciﬁcation form would suﬃce as long as it can be encoded in the underlying SMT logic (or already represented as such). However, complex logical speciﬁcations may make the synthesis constraint more diﬃcult to resolve, and thus a combination of input-output examples and an external validation oracle, employed by Jha et al., is preferable for eﬃcient program synthesis.
2For simplicity, we represent global program arguments as additional 0-ary components in the library. They are “invoked” in the ﬁrst lines of the program.

5.1. Component-Based Synthesis

69

Example 5.1. Suppose we want to synthesize a program that turns oﬀ the rightmost 1 bit in a given 5-bit vector. Our desired program has a single input I and a single output O. Our library consists of 2 components, with the following speciﬁcations:

Component
f1(x1, x2) := x1 & x2 f2(x) := x − 1

Semantics φ1(x1, x2, y) : [y = bvand(x1, x2)] φ2(x, y) : [y = bvsub(x, 000012)]

Finally, our spec φ is a single input-output example: (010102, 010002). Figure 5.1 shows the SMT constraint that encodes this problem
and includes all constraints (a)-(c), discussed above. Note that in this case φ contains a single input-output example, thus we need to encode only one data ﬂow through the program (i.e. variables ijk and oj). In general, every input-output example requires its own set of data ﬂow variables. The location variables ijk and oj, however, are only deﬁned once: they represent structure of the desired program, which does not change across diﬀerent input-output examples.
A valid model for this constraint contains the following assignments for the location variables:

{ o1 = 2, o2 = 1, i11 = 1, i12 = 0, i21 = 0, i0 = 0, o = 2}
They correspond to the following program P (x), which indeed turns oﬀ the rightmost 1 bit of x:

def P(x) { t1 := x - 1; t2 := t1 & x; return t2; }

5.1.2 Sketch generation and completion
The synthesis approach of Jha et al. produced a complete SMT encoding of the entire synthesis problem, given a library of components and the desired spec. While powerful, such an encoding is diﬃcult to design and implement. An alternative solution is to split the synthesis process into sketch generation and sketch completion. The sketching technique, as introduced in §3.3.1, assumes the presence of a sketch – a partial program with holes to be ﬁlled with subexpressions by the solver. Typically, these

70

Constraint Solving

1 (define-sort Bit5 () (_ BitVec 5)) 2 (define-fun input-count () Int 1) 3 (define-fun component-count () Int 2) 4 (define-fun line-count () Int (+ input-count component-count))

6 ; Component semantics 7 (define-fun comp1 ((x1 Bit5) (x2 Bit5)) Bit5 (bvand x1 x2)) 8 (define-fun comp2 ((x Bit5)) Bit5 (bvsub x #b00001))

10 ; ijk – kth input of component fj; oj – its output;

11 (declare-const i11 Bit5) (declare-const i12 Bit5) (declare-const i21

Bit5) (declare-const o1 Bit5) (declare-const o2 Bit5)

12 ; ijk and oj are the corresponding line numbers

13 (declare-const li11 Int) (declare-const li12 Int) (declare-const li21

Int) (declare-const lo1 Int) (declare-const lo2 Int)

14 ; Variables and line numbers for the program input i0 and output o

15 (declare-const i0 Bit5) (declare-const li0 Int)

16

(declare-const o Bit5) (declare-const lo Int)

17 (assert (and (= li0 0) (= lo (- line-count 1))))

19 ; Well-formedness constraints

20 (assert (and (>= li11 0) (< li11 line-count)

21

(>= li12 0) (< li12 line-count)

22

(>= li21 0) (< li21 line-count)

23

(>= lo1 input-count) (< lo1 line-count)

24

(>= lo2 input-count) (< lo2 line-count)))

25 (assert (not (= lo1 lo2)))

26 (assert (and (< li11 lo1) (< li12 lo1) (< li21 lo2))) ; Acyclicity

27 (assert (and (= o1 (comp1 i11 i12)) (= o2 (comp2 i21)))) ; Components

29 ; Data ﬂow constraints: equal locations should hold equal variables 30 (assert (and (=> (= lo2 lo) (= o2 o)) 31 (=> (= li0 li11) (= i0 i11)) (=> (= li0 li12) (= i0 i12)) 32 (=> (= li0 li21) (= i0 i21)) (=> (= li0 lo1) (= i0 o1)) 33 (=> (= li0 lo2) (= i0 o2)) (=> (= li0 lo) (= i0 o)) 34 (=> (= li11 li12) (= i11 i12)) (=> (= li11 li21) (= i11 i21)) 35 (=> (= li11 lo1) (= i11 o1)) (=> (= li11 lo2) (= i11 o2)) 36 (=> (= li11 lo) (= i11 o)) (=> (= li12 li21) (= i12 i21)) 37 (=> (= li12 lo1) (= i12 o1)) (=> (= li12 lo2) (= i12 o2)) 38 (=> (= li12 lo) (= i12 o)) (=> (= li21 lo1) (= i21 o1)) 39 (=> (= li21 lo2) (= i21 o2)) (=> (= li21 lo) (= i21 o)) 40 (=> (= lo1 lo2) (= o1 o2)) (=> (= lo1 lo) (= o1 o))))

42 (assert (and (= i0 #b01010) (= o #b01000))) ; Input-output example Figure 5.1: A program synthesis constraint that encodes the problem in Example 5.1.

5.2. Solver-Aided Programming

71

sketches are written by a human, but it is also possible to generate them automatically.
Recently, Feng et al. developed SyPet, a technique for componentbased synthesis that (a) does not require the component library to be annotated with speciﬁcations, and (b) deliberately decomposes the synthesis process into sketch generation and sketch completion to keep the analysis tractable [31]. In this approach, the ﬁrst phase performs reachability analysis on the component APIs (represented as a Petri net [119]). Every found reachable path corresponds to a viable combination of components in the library as a sketch. The second phase then completes this sketch with program parameters and variables using an SMT encoding.
The separation of component-based synthesis into two phases that are resolved by diﬀerent techniques is a key idea that makes SyPet scale. While it is possible to construct a Petri net that represents the entire synthesis problem, that net is much larger, and analyzing its reachable paths quickly becomes intractable. We also note that the choice of Petri nets as a technology for sketch generation is speciﬁc to SyPet; a diﬀerent application might warrant a diﬀerent approach.

5.2 Solver-Aided Programming
Developing a problem-speciﬁc SAT/SMT encoding and generating the corresponding formula can be cumbersome and time-consuming. For this reason, the community built several frameworks for expressing synthesis problems (and some related ones) that translate a representation in a high-level programming language into the corresponding formula behind the scenes. More generally, such frameworks implement the idea of solver-aided programming: they augment high-level programming languages with new constructs that require constraint solving to be materialized [139]. Such constructs enable embedding second-level subproblems into regular programs in the host language.
In §3.3.1, we described sketching—a form of syntactic bias that describes the program space for synthesis as a program in a high-level C-like programming language augmented with symbolic holes and gener-

72

Constraint Solving

ators. Sketch is the ﬁrst framework for solver-aided program synthesis: its compiler translates the sketches into equivalent SAT formulas such that their satisfying models can be mapped to the corresponding choices for the holes and generator traces [132]. Thus, a sketch can be seen as a program in a high-level programming language whose compiler relies on a SAT solver to materialize some language constructs.
In 2013, Torlak and Bodik [139] and, independently, Uhler and Dave [142] extended the ideas of Sketch to more general forms of solver-aided programming. Torlak and Bodik developed Rosette: a symbolic framework that integrates into the virtual machine of Racket3 and extends the language with new solver-aided constructs. Smten implements a similar idea in the Haskell host language.
Apart from program synthesis, solver-aided constructs enable embedding veriﬁcation, fault localization, and angelic execution queries into the programs. For instance, Rosette extends Racket with the following solver-aided constructs:
• (define-symbolic id 1 . . . id k type ) Deﬁnes k symbolic holes that may be in Racket computations as regular variables. The Rosette compiler interprets an expression with such a hole symbolically, representing it as an AST. The parts without any holes are evaluated by the Racket VM as usual.
• (verify expr ) A veriﬁcation query. Attempts to ﬁnd any binding of the symbolic variables in the expression that violates the assertions in scope.
• (solve expr ) An angelic execution query. Attempts to ﬁnd a binding of the symbolic variables in the expression that satisﬁes the assertions in scope.
• (synthesize #:forall inputs #:guarantee expr ) A synthesis query. Finds a binding of the symbolic variables in the expression that are not universally quantiﬁed in the inputs, such that they satisfy the assertions in scope. In addition to explicitly deﬁned holes, these variables are also generated by
3http://racket-lang.org

5.2. Solver-Aided Programming

73

grammars, which are deﬁned similarly to generators in Sketch. Applying generate-forms to the binding produces a syntactic representation of the synthesized expression in that grammar.
• (debug [ filter ] failing-expr ) A debugging or fault localization query. Produces a minimal unsatisﬁable core of the expressions speciﬁed by the ﬁlter—that is, some subset of expressions that is guaranteed to be relevant to the given assertion failure. In other words, the assertion cannot be satisﬁed without changing at least one expression from the core.

Example 5.2 (Re-used from [140]). Consider a domain of ﬁnite state automata (FSAs). As shown in [74], it is possible to use Racket’s metaprogramming facilities (i.e., macros) to deﬁne a fast and concise FSA DSL with executable semantics. In this DSL, an example deﬁnition of an FSA that accepts the language c(ad)∗r looks as follows:

1 (define m (automaton init

2

[init : (c → more)]

3

[more : (a → more) (d → more) (r → end)]

4

[end : ]))

where automaton is a Racket macro that accepts a list of states and transitions, and returns an executable FSA.
Using Rosette’s symbolic evaluation facilities, we can use solveraided queries to verify FSA behavior, synthesize FSAs, or angelically execute them in search for an accepted input. We ﬁrst deﬁne some utility functions to create and manipulate symbolic words:

1 ; Draws a word of length k from the given alphabet.

2 (define (word k alphabet)

3

(for/list ([i k])

4

(define-symbolic* idx integer?)

5

(list-ref alphabet idx)))

7 ; Draws a word of length 0 ≤ n ≤ k from the given alphabet.

8 (define (word* k alphabet)

9

(define-symbolic* n integer?)

10

(take (word k alphabet) n))

12 ; Returns a string encoding of the given list of symbols w.

74

Constraint Solving

13 ; For example, (word->str ’(c a r)) returns "car". 14 (define (word->str w) (apply str-append (map symbol->str w)))

16 ; Returns true iﬀ regex matches the string encoding of w. 17 (define (spec regex w) (regexp-match? regex (word->str w)))

and then construct the desired queries:
1 ; Angelic execution: ﬁnd a word of length ≤ 4 accepted by m. 2 (define w (word* 4 (c a d r))) 3 (define model (solve (assert (m w)))) 4 (evaluate w model) ; ’() 5 ; Indicates that the empty word ’() is accepted by m.

7 ; Veriﬁcation: ﬁnd a counterexample to a given regex that m accepts. 8 (verify (assert (eq? (spec #px"^c[ad]*r$" w) (m w)))) 9 verify: no counterexample found

11 ; Synthesis: ﬁnd an FSA that implements the regex ^c[ad]+r$ for all

words of length ≤ 4 using an FSA sketch M [140, Figure 3].

12 (define model

13

(synthesize #:forall w

14

(assert (eq? (spec #px"^c[ad]+r$" w) (M w)))))

15 (generate-forms model)

16 ; (define M

17 ; (automaton init

18 ;

[init : (c → s1)]

19 ;

[s1 : (a → s2) (d → s2) (r → reject)]

20 ;

[s2 : (a → s2) (d → s2) (r → end)]

21 ;

[end : ]))

Implementation Internally, Rosette implements these constructs by embedding a symbolic evaluator into the Racket’s VM. It follows the standard evaluation strategy, tracking the symbolic expressions as ASTs and evaluating the concrete ones using Racket semantics. Most importantly, Rosette’s VM implements a clever technique for merging symbolic expressions produced by diﬀerent conditional branches in the program’s control ﬂow [140]. Without such merging, the number of symbolic subexpressions and the resulting formula would grow exponentially, overlooking many opportunities for concrete evaluation.

5.3. Inductive Logic Programming

75

The result of symbolic evaluation for each solver-aided construct is an SMT query to the underlying solver. Its solution (either a model or an unsatisﬁable core) is translated by the VM back into the host language (Racket or Haskell) in terms of the original program.
In addition to simplifying design of problem encodings, solver-aided frameworks also enable domain separation: an application designer can focus on their DSL design without intertwining it with the encoding details of solver-aided queries. As a result, these frameworks are widely successful. Rosette, for instance, is used in numerous research projects on program synthesis and veriﬁcation (e.g. [14, 107, 108, 147]).

5.3 Inductive Logic Programming
Inductive logic programming (ILP) is the ﬁeld of automatic inference of logical programs from examples [92]. In contrast to other synthesis approaches in this survey, ILP is focused on synthesizing ﬁrst-order rules and relations instead of functional expressions or programs. However, it is similar to constraint-based synthesis in its methodology—applying logical inference to derive the desired relation. Since the main speciﬁcation kind in ILP is a set of examples, ILP is also closely related to programming by examples, discussed in Chapter 7.
A problem in ILP is given by examples (a set of facts) and, optionally, background knowledge (a set of rules that describe the domain). For instance, given the following examples:

parent(jack, mary). parent(mary, bob).

father(jack, mary). mother(mary, bob).

male(jack). male(bob). female(mary).

an ILP system is able to infer ﬁrst-order rules and constraints such as:
← male(X), female(X). male(X) ← father(X, Y ). father(X, Y ), mother(X, Y ) ← parent(X, Y ).
A speciﬁcation in ILP is a target predicate used in the examples whose deﬁnition is to be inferred. It is also not uncommon to omit it and let the system infer any interesting facts and rules from the provided

76

Constraint Solving

data. In both capacities ILP has been successfully applied to numerous domains, including biological discovery [69, 95, 122, 136], ecology [138], and natural language processing [83, 150].
Modern ILP algorithms perform various forms of hypothesis search, employing a combination of inductive and deductive logical inference. Speciﬁc search techniques such as inverse resolution [94] and inverse entailment [93] are beyond the scope of this survey. We refer the reader to ILP surveys [27, 92] for a comprehensive introduction.
The most notable recent development in ILP is meta-interpretive learning (MIL) [96, 97]. It extends classic generalization techniques with an eﬃcient implementation of predicate invention: automatic introduction of useful sub-predicates in the derivation. This allows MIL to learn complex logical programs including recursive predicate deﬁnitions and clauses that are hierarchically constructed from re-usable blocks.

6
Stochastic Search
The stochastic synthesis approaches learn a distribution over the space of programs in the hypothesis space that is conditioned on the speciﬁcation, and then sample programs from the distribution to learn a consistent program. The goal of these techniques is to use the learnt distribution to guide the search of programs that are more likely to lead to programs that conform with the speciﬁcation. Some common approaches to learn program distributions include Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, genetic programming, and machine learning. We now brieﬂy describe the main ideas of these approaches.
6.1 Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm for Sampling Expressions
The stochastic SyGuS solver [3] uses Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to sample expressions from a given grammar to learn an expression that is consistent with a speciﬁcation. This solver was inspired from the work on using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling based techniques for super-optimizing the loop-free binary assembly code [124]. The key idea of the search algorithm is to ﬁrst deﬁne a Score function that assign a cost to every program in the hypothesis space of all
77

78

Stochastic Search

possible programs, which deﬁnes a probability distribution over the domain of programs. Since the cost function aims to model a highly irregular and high-dimensional search space, it is typically complex and non-continuous, which makes it diﬃcult for direct sampling techniques to sample programs from this distribution. Therefore, the MetropolisHastings algorithm is used to sample desired programs.
The space of all possible programs (of some ﬁxed length) in the hypothesis space can be represented using a large dense graph, where the nodes represent diﬀerent partial expressions and an edge from node n1 (corresponding to expression e1) to node n2 (corresponding to expression e2) denote the single-edit transformation to obtain expression e2 from e1. The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm performs a probabilistic walk on the graph starting from a random node to reach the desired node that satisﬁes the speciﬁcation. Let Score(e) denote the cost function associated with a node n denoting the expression e, which captures the notion of the extent to which e meets the speciﬁcation φ. Having the probability distribution P assign probability P (e) ∝ Score(e), we increase the chances of the algorithm to reaching the desired expression with the best score. The algorithm performs the probabilistic walk in the direction of increasing expression scores. However, since the cost function is non-continuous, the algorithm can also move to expressions in the graph with a lower score, with some low probability.
The stochastic SyGuS solver deﬁnes the score of an expression e as Score(e) = e−βC(e), where β is a constant set to 0.5 and C(e) denotes the number of examples for which e is incorrect. The value of Score(e) is large when C(e) is small denoting that the expression e is correct on most of the speciﬁcation examples. When C(e) = 0, the expression e is the desired expression. Consider the size of the programs is ﬁxed to a constant k and the graph consists of all programs of size k in the hypothesis space. The solver picks the ﬁrst expression e randomly in the graph. It then randomly selects a node ν in the parse tree of e. Let eν denote the sub-expression that is rooted at this node ν. The algorithm then uniformly chooses another expression eν of size equal to that of eν from its neighborhood. Let e denote the new expression obtained by replacing the subexpression eν in e

6.1. Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm for Sampling Expressions

79

if 1

1 <= / = / >=

1/3 2 3 4 1/4

2 34

1/4

5

6

5 1/4 6 1/4

x / y / 0 / 1

(a)

(b)

Figure 6.1: (a) The shape of all expressions of size 6 in the grammar shown in Figure 4.1, (b) The likelihood of assigning diﬀerent terminal symbols to each node in the parse trees of size 6.

with eν. Given the original expression e and the mutated expression e , the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm chooses to make the mutated expression the new candidate expression using the following acceptance ratio: α(e, e ) = min(1, Score(e)/Score(e )). Intuitively, the algorithm accepts the mutation if the new expression results in higher score value (i.e. α(e, e ) = 1). Otherwise, it chooses to accept the new expression with probability equal to α(e, e ) < 1.
Give a speciﬁcation φ, the size of the desired expression is typically not known apriori. The stochastic solver starts with the program size k = 1 and using some probability pm searches for programs of size k + 1 after each iteration of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm.
Consider the conditional linear integer arithmetic grammar in Figure 4.1 (with additional leaf terminals denoting constants 0 and 1) and the speciﬁcation of the unknown function f to be synthesized to be that of the maximum function such that φ : f (x, y) ≥ x ∧ f (x, y) ≥ y ∧ (f (x, y) = x ∨ f (x, y) = y). Let’s assume the stochastic solver is currently searching for expressions of size k = 6. The shape of the parse trees of all expressions of size 6 in the grammar is shown in Figure 6.1(a). There are in total 768 such expressions. The possible values of terminals for diﬀerent nodes in the parse tree is shown in Figure 6.1(b).

80

e if

>= y x

0

x

Stochastic Search

e’ if

>= y x

0

y

Figure 6.2: An example mutation considered by the stochastic solver.
Let us assume the solver chose the expression e = if (x ≤ 0, y, x) as the current candidate expression (whose likelihood is 1/768), and the solver selects the Boolean predicate x ≤ 0 to mutate. The example mutation is shown in Figure 6.2. Since there are 48 diﬀerent predicate choices, the probability to mutate the predicate x ≤ 0 to y ≤ 0 is 1/6 × 1/48 = 1/288 and e = if (y ≤ 0, y, x). For a given set of inputoutput examples {(−1, 4), (−3, −1), (−1, −2), (1, 2), (3, 1), (6, 2)}, the scores of the expressions are Score(e) = e−2β and Score(e ) = e−3β. The solver then choose to mutate expression e to e with probability equal to e−β. Note that if the algorithm had considered the mutation to obtain the expression e = if (x ≤ y, y, x), then the score would have been Score(e ) = 1, and e would be the new candidate expression chosen with probability 1 by the algorithm.
6.2 Genetic Programming
Genetic programming [73] can be considered as an extension of genetic algorithms [56] to the domain of computer programs, where a population of programs are continuously evolved and transformed into new

6.2. Genetic Programming

81

generations of programs using principles inspired from biological evolution such as Darwin’s theory of natural selection and natural genetic operations including crossover, mutation, duplication, and deletion [71]. Compared to the traditional genetic algorithms, the evolving structures in genetic programming are hierarchical computer programs of dynamically varying shape and size, where a set of functions and terminal symbols deﬁne the complete hypothesis space of possible programs. The genetic programming algorithms maintain a population of individual programs and use the mutation and crossover operations to generate program variants. The mutation operation performs random changes to programs, whereas the crossover operation allows for reusing useful subprograms across diﬀerent programs. The ﬁtness function corresponds to the notion of how well a program satisﬁes the speciﬁcation and is used to suitability of diﬀerent program variants. A program that meets the speciﬁcation during the evolution is then returned as the desired one.
The Genetic programming algorithm starts with a set of terminals and functions that are appropriate for a given domain. This set deﬁnes the complete search space of programs considered by the algorithm. There are two key requirements of the hypothesis space: i) the desired program to be synthesized exists in the search space, and ii) each function should be able to accept as its argument a value returned by any other function or a terminal value. The ﬁrst requirement ensures existence of the desired program, whereas the second requirement ensures the well-formedness of the programs obtained by mutations and crossover during the evolution of the programs.
There are four main steps in designing the genetic programming algorithm. First, a set of terminal and function symbols need to be deﬁned. Second, a ﬁtness measure needs to be deﬁned that corresponds to the viability of a program, i.e. how well the program satisﬁes the speciﬁcation. Third, we need to deﬁne a number of search parameters such as the size of population, number of expressions in a program, probability of crossover, mutation, reproduction, deletion, etc. These parameters guide the evolutionary process. Finally, we need to determine the termination criterion for ending the evolutionary process and returning the resulting program.

82

Stochastic Search

The genetic algorithm ﬁrst creates a random population of programs, where each individual program in the population are generated randomly using the terminal and function symbols. Each program in the population is syntactically correct because of the requirement on the set of terminal and function symbols. The ﬁtness of each program in the population is then measured. The ﬁtness measures are typically domain-speciﬁc and problem dependent. Some examples of ﬁtness measures include the number of input-output examples being correct, the deviation between the program output and desired outputs, properties based on program execution (such as time, energy etc.), or a multi-objective cost function combining multiple criterion. The initial generation consisting of random programs generally has very poor ﬁtness, but some individuals have a higher ﬁtness score than others. This diﬀerence between ﬁtness scores is used for performing crossover and mutation operations.
The crossover operation randomly selects two programs from the population (called parents) based on their ﬁtness scores. It then randomly selects a node (in the corresponding parse trees) independently from each of the two programs and swaps them. We now obtain two oﬀspring programs. This operation is repeated multiple times to obtain a set of new oﬀspring programs. An example crossover operation is shown in Figure 6.3. The mutation operation randomly selects a program based on the ﬁtness score and selects a node. It then deletes the sub-tree rooted at the selected node and grows a new sub-tree randomly using the terminal and function symbols. An example mutation operation is shown in Figure 6.4. The reproduction operation randomly selects a program based on the ﬁtness scores and copies it to the new population.
The genetic programming algorithm iteratively uses these operations to evolve population of programs until the termination criterion is satisﬁed. After termination, the single best program produced during the evolution based on the ﬁtness score is harvested and returned as the result. If the returned program corresponds to the desired program, the run of the genetic algorithm is designated as a successful run.
The success of genetic programming based systems crucially depends on the design of a good ﬁtness function, which require non-trivial

6.2. Genetic Programming

83

parent1
+

*

-

z

2x

4

parent2
*

x

-

y

2

offspring1
+

-

-

offspring2
*

x

*

y

2x

4

z

2

Figure 6.3: An example crossover operation. The algorithm randomly selects two nodes in two parent programs and swaps them to generate two new oﬀspring programs.

parent

+

*

-

z

2x

4

offspring

+

*

-

z

2x

+

2

y

Figure 6.4: An example mutation operation. The algorithm randomly selects a node in a parent program and replaces the sub-tree rooted at it with a new randomly generated expression.

84

Stochastic Search

insights and creativity. Genetic programming has been used to discover new mutual exclusion algorithms [68] and to ﬁx bugs in imperative programs [80]. There have also been some interesting recent work in combining genetic programming techniques with logical reasoning techniques [61, 68].

6.3 Machine Learning
There have been some machine learning based techniques developed to guide the search process for learning a correct program from the hypothesis space [82, 89]. The main idea of these techniques is to learn a probability distribution over the space of programs that is conditioned by the speciﬁcation (such as input-output examples). This probability distribution is then used to sample programs that are more likely to be consistent with the given speciﬁcation.
Menon et al. [89] propose a machine learning framework for Programming By Example, where the hypothesis space is deﬁned by a context-free grammar (CFG), and given a set of input-output examples, the system learns weights for diﬀerent rules (called clues) in the grammar to obtain a corresponding probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG). The PCFG is then used to guide the enumerative search to ﬁnd the desired program. The weights of diﬀerent grammar rules conditioned on the input-output examples are trained using a training corpus of input-output examples and the corresponding programs.
The framework is instantiated on a text processing language, which adds text functions on top of the FlashFill DSL [43]. The domain expert then manually deﬁnes certain features that can help the learning algorithm identify correct programs given the input-output examples. Some features include dedup_cue that checks whether any string in the set of output strings is duplicated, sort_cue that checks if the output strings are sorted etc. The learning process exploits the fact that the chance of a rule being used for a desired program for a set of input-output pairs (x¯, y¯) greatly depends on certain characteristics in the structure of x¯ and x¯, namely the features. This approach results in an order of magnitude better performance over an enumerative baseline.

6.4. Neural Program Synthesis

85

A drawback of this framework is that designing useful clues (features) manually is a time consuming and diﬃcult task, and requires a lot of domain expertise. Moreover, since the learnt weight results in a PCFG, the framework can not use contextual information about the partial trees generated during the search to more eﬃciently guide the exploration.

6.4 Neural Program Synthesis
The problem of program synthesis and program induction has seen a lot of recent interest from the deep learning community. The proposed approaches can be divided into two categories: i) program induction, and ii) program synthesis. The neural architectures that perform program induction learn a network that is capable of replicating the behavior of the desired program, whereas the neural systems that perform program synthesis return an interpretable program that matches the desired speciﬁcation behavior.
The program induction techniques develop new neural architectures that can learn the behavior of a program that is consistent with a given set of input-output examples. Many of these approaches are inspired from computation modules such as CPU [40, 118], GPU [66], and data structures such as stacks [64]. The key idea in these approaches is to develop a continuous representation of the atomic operations of the network, and then use either end-to-end training of a neural controller or reinforcement learning to learn the program behavior. Even though this work on program induction has led to several promising neural architectures, there are also some shortcomings. One shortcoming is that these techniques do not generate an interpretable model of the learnt program, and typically require large computational resources and several thousands of input-output examples per synthesis task.
Some recently proposed neural systems do learn interpretable programs. The Neural FlashFill [105] system develops two neural architectures: 1) the cross correlation I/O encoder that produces a continuous representation of the set of input-output examples, and ii) the RecursiveReverse-Recursive Neural Network (R3NN) that incrementally synthesizes a program in the DSL given the continuous representation of the

86

Stochastic Search

examples. Neural-RAM [76] learns a circuit composed of a given set of modules that is consistent with a set of input-output examples. It ﬁrst develops a continuous representation of all modules, and then learns a controller that deﬁnes how the diﬀerent modules are connected with each other. DeepCoder [7] learns embeddings of integer input-output examples to learn a distribution over the possible space of functions that are likely to be useful for the desired transformation on the examples. It then uses the learnt distribution over functions to guide a depth-ﬁrst based top-down enumerative algorithm similar to the one shown in §4.1.1. Finally, there are also some recent probabilistic programming languages such as Terpret [36] and Forth [120] that enable programmers to write partial programs and use gradient descent based techniques to complete them such that the completed programs satisfy the input-output examples.
Given the FlashFill DSL, the Neural FlashFill [105] system learns a generative model of programs in the DSL that is conditioned on the input-output examples. The generative model is trained end-toend using a large training set of programs in the DSL together with their corresponding input-output examples. The training set is generate automatically by sampling programs from the DSL and then using a rule-based approach to generate conforming input-output examples. The system develops two key neural architectures: i) The I/O encoder and ii) the R3NN network. Starting from the start symbol of the grammar, the system uses the R3NN to incrementally construct the desired program. The R3NN takes a partial program tree (derivation in the grammar), and decides which non-terminal node in the tree to expand and with which expansion rule. The generative process is conditioned by the I/O encoding vector.
The I/O encoder generates a continuous representation of the set of input-output examples. The cross correlation encoder ﬁrst runs bidirectional LSTMs over the input and output strings, and then computes the cross correlation between the two output tensors obtained from the LSTMs. The key idea insight is to learn which parts of output strings come from which parts of the input strings.

6.4. Neural Program Synthesis

87

The R3NN learns a generative model over the trees in the DSL. The model has the following 4 parameters: i) a vector representation for each symbol in the grammar, ii) a vector representation for each rule in the grammar, iii) a deep neural network that takes as input the set of RHS symbols of a rule and generates a representation of the corresponding LHS symbol, and iv) a deep neural network that as input the representation of an LHS symbol of a rule and generates a representation for each of the corresponding RHS symbols. The R3NN ﬁrst assigns a vector representation to each leaf node of a partial tree, and then performs a recursive pass going up in the tree to assign a global representation to the root. It then performs a reverse-recursive pass from the root to assign a global representation to each node in the tree. Intuitively, the idea is to assign a representation to each node in the tree such that the node knows about every other node in the tree. The R3NN encoding for an example partial tree in the grammar with the recursive and reverse-recursive passes is shown in Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6 respectively.
The Neural FlashFill system after being trained on synthetic programs of size upto 13 is able to successfully synthesize both programs (upto size 13) that it has seen during the training but with diﬀerent input-output examples, and programs that it has not seen during the training. The 1-best strategy (choosing best expansion from the distribution at each expansion) yields an accuracy of about 60% whereas it increases to 97% with 300-samples. Moreover, it is also able to learn desired programs for 91 (38%) of 238 real-world FlashFill benchmarks. A majority of the unsolved FlashFill benchmarks belong to the category of large programs. One shortcoming of the R3NN network is that it is currently challenging to train for programs of larger size.
There has also been some work on synthesizing programs using quantitative objectives [17, 18, 19]. The idea of program smoothing [19] is to reduce the synthesis problem to a sequence of numerical optimization problems, where the program is approximated in some continuous space. The approximate objective becomes closer to the original quantitative objective as the sequence progresses. The idea of combining

88

Stochastic Search

Figure 6.5: The initial recursive pass of the R3NN.

Figure 6.6: The reverse-recursive pass of the R3NN.

6.4. Neural Program Synthesis

89

program smoothing with neural program synthesis techniques can be quite beneﬁcial for the synthesis tasks with quantitative objectives.

7
Programming by Examples
7.1 Problem Deﬁnition
As described in §1.3, the problem of program synthesis is largely deﬁned by the choice of its three main components: intent speciﬁcation, program space, and search algorithm. When dealing with a novel problem, we can usually control the choice of the algorithm and, to some extent, the program space. However, the particular speciﬁcation kind is typically a fundamental part of the real-life problem. Since the available speciﬁcation kind naturally limits the available choice for the other two problem components, it is not surprising that limits in intent speciﬁcation inspire the most innovations in subﬁelds of synthesis. The subﬁeld of programming by example (PBE) is one such instance.
In PBE, the synthesis problem is given by input-output examples (or, more generally, input-output constraints). They specify the behavior of the desired program on a subset of its valid inputs. In the simplest PBE scenario, the speciﬁcation deﬁnes the program’s outputs; in more complex cases, it speciﬁes some properties or constraints on the outputs instead of their precise values. Examples are generally preferred thanks to their ease of use for a user specifying the problem, but suﬃciently simple constraints on the outputs may be used for the same purpose.
91

92

Programming by Examples

Example 7.1. The following set of input-output examples speciﬁes the √+
behavior of the program x : R → R:
{1 → 1, 9 → 3, −3 → ⊥}
Example 7.2. The following set of input-output examples speciﬁes the behavior of a Flash Fill program (see §2.1) that extracts the ﬁrst word from a given input string:

Input
Alice Smith Benjamin H. Baker

Output
Alice Benjamin

Example 7.3. The following set of input-output constraints specify the behavior of a program that ﬁlters valid numbers out of a given list of strings. Each constraint speciﬁes an input list and a subset of the corresponding output list. Formally, an output constraint of kind “? [e1, . . . , en]” requires that the program’s output (“?”) must contain [e1, . . . , en] as a sublist. Such a constraint is usually preferable to full input-output examples when the correct output is too large to specify.

Input
[ “Alice”, “50”, “North America”, “-34”, “0”, . . . ] [ “Benjamin”, . . . ]

Output
? [“50”, “0”] ? []

Note how the ﬁrst input-output constraint omits “-34” even though it should also be present in the desired output (because the desired program must ﬁlter all valid numbers from the given input list).

Input-output examples exhibit several unique properties, which set the PBE subﬁeld apart from the rest of program synthesis.

Ease of use: Examples are very easy to provide, explain, and verify (as opposed to other widespread spec kinds such as logical formulas and assertions). This makes them an ideal speciﬁcation kind for non-programming application domains such as data wrangling in Excel or direct graphical manipulation.

7.2. Version Space Algebra

93

Ambiguity: Examples are an under-speciﬁcation: most of the time, there exists more than one program that is consistent with the given set of examples. Moreover, in typical real-life languages, the space of consistent programs is either inﬁnite or extremely large (e.g. up to 1020 in wrangling domains [113]). This inherent ambiguity in problem speciﬁcation constitutes an additional challenge in PBE: we need to ﬁnd not just some program that is consistent with the spec but the intended one (or semantically equivalent).
In the rest of this section, we focus on the most popular methods for dealing with challenges of PBE: (a) ﬁnding consistent programs, (b) handling an enormous space of consistent program candidates, and (c) disambiguating user intent in order to pick a single program candidate.

7.2 Version Space Algebra

If a synthesis algorithm aims to satisfy an underlying user intent in an example-based spec (as opposed to ﬁnding any single program that is consistent with it), it must somehow deal with enormous spaces of ambiguous program candidates. One popular tool to resolve that is using a data structure called version space algebra (VSA) [77, 91, 113]. It allows to represent potentially exponential program sets in polynomial space and perform various operations on these sets in polynomial time.
Deﬁnition 1 (Version space algebra). Let N be a symbol in a DSL L. A version space algebra is a representation for a set N of programs rooted at N . The grammar of VSAs is:

N := {P1, . . . , Pk} | U(N1, . . . , Nk) | F (N1, . . . , Nk)
where F is any k-ary operator in L, and Pj are some programs in L. The semantics of VSA as a set of programs is given as follows:

P ∈ {P1, . . . Pk} P ∈ U(N1, . . . , Nk) P ∈ F (N1, . . . , Nk)

if ∃ j : P = Pj if ∃ j : P ∈ Nj if P = F (P1, . . . , Pk) ∧ ∀j : Pj ∈ Nj

Intuitively, a VSA is a DAG where each node represents a set of programs. Leaf nodes contain explicit enumerations of programs; they

94

Programming by Examples

are composed into larger sets by two possible VSA constructor nodes. Union nodes U represent a set union of their constituent VSAs. Join nodes F represent a cross-product of their constituent VSAs, with an associated operator F applied to all combinations of parameter programs from the cross-product.
One can also interpret VSA as a sub-language of its original DSL L. If we associate each VSA leaf node with a fresh terminal symbol, and each constructor node with a fresh nonterminal, we obtain a context-free grammar L ⊂ L where join nodes correspond to operator calls and union nodes correspond to alternations:
Example 7.4. Consider the following DSL L, which models a subset of Flash Fill:
string N := ConstantString(s) | Substring(P, P ); int P := AbsolutePosition(k); int k; string s;
It contains two nonterminals N and P , two terminals k and s, and references three operators ConstantString, Substring, and AbsolutePosition. Every program rooted at N in this DSL outputs a string–either a constant string s or a substring of a given input deﬁned by two positions P . Each position, in turn, is deﬁned by an integer k, which represents an absolute position in a string, counted from the left if k ≥ 0 and from the right if k < 0.
The following VSA N represents 2 + 2 × (1 + 2) = 8 programs in L:
N = U (ConstantString ({“foo”, “bar”}), Substring (AbsolutePosition ({0, 1}, U (AbsolutePosition ({10}), AbsolutePosition ({−1, −5})))))
It is equivalent to the following context-free grammar L ⊂ L:
string N := ConstantString(s ) | Substring(P1, P2); int P1 := AbsolutePosition(k1); int P2 := Q1 | Q2; int Q1 := AbsolutePosition(k2);

7.3. Deduction-Based Techniques

95

int Q2 := AbsolutePosition(k3); string s ∈ {“foo”, “bar”} ;
int k1 ∈ {0, 1}, k2 ∈ {10}, k3 ∈ {−1, −5}
The key property of VSAs is their ability to encode exponential sets of programs in polynomial space. They achieve that by providing two kinds of sharing among program subexpressions. One is provided by the join nodes, which encode a cross-product of their subexpression sets. The other is provided by the DAG structure of a VSA, which allows subexpression sharing among program sets that reference the same VSA node through diﬀerent paths in the DAG.
Another powerful property of VSAs is ability to quickly perform various set-theoretic operations on them. These operations are usually deﬁned inductively over the VSA structure. Thus, their running time is proportional to the number of nodes in the VSA, as opposed to the number of programs it represents (which is usually exponentially greater). We refer the reader to [113] for the implementation details of all such operations; in this overview, we simply present a list of them:
• VSA intersection N1 ∩ N2 constructs a VSA that represents all programs present in both N1 and N2.
• VSA clustering N /σ partitions a VSA N into non-intersecting sub-VSAs based on the output of their contained programs on a given input σ.
• VSA ranking Toph(N , k) ﬁnds the topmost k programs in a VSA N with respect to a ranking function h : N → R.
• VSA projection, or ﬁltering N φ eliminates all programs in N that do not satisfy a given spec φ.
The synthesis algorithms in §7.3.1 make use of these operations.
7.3 Deduction-Based Techniques
Although any of the previously discussed synthesis algorithms can be applied to a PBE problem, certain specialized algorithms usually perform

96

Programming by Examples

much better. They are based on the idea of deductive search: pushing the given examples through the grammar top-down. 1 Intuitively, it applies the principle of divide-and-conquer to reduce the given synthesis problem to smaller subproblems of the same kind. The particular choice of subproblems and composition of their results depends on the algorithm.
Two families of deduction-based techniques have been developed in the last decade. One, popularized by Flash Fill [43] and the following PROSE framework [113], uses inverse semantics of the DSL operators. The other, popularized by the Myth [102] and Synquid [111] systems, uses a type-theoretic interpretation of the PBE problem.

7.3.1 Inverse Semantics
In this approach, examples φ are propagated top-down through the grammar from expressions to their subexpressions. In other words, given a synthesis problem to ﬁnd an expression of kind F (E1, E2) that satisﬁes a spec φ (denoted as F (E1, E2) φ), it reduces this problem to several simpler subproblems of kind E1 φ1 and E2 φ2. Here φ1 and φ2 are fresh specs on the subexpressions E1 and E2 of the desired program. They are constructed in a way that ensures that any program F (E1, E2) with such subexpressions would satisfy φ.
Construction of subexpression specs depends on the requested toplevel operator F in the desired program. Essentially, we need to invert F : if a program F (E1, E2) outputs y on an input σ, what should E1 and E2 output on the same input? Answering this question provides us with necessary specs on E1 and E2 that ensure the entire program satisﬁes φ.
In practice, using a complete inverse semantics for each operator in the grammar may be overly computationally expensive. Most real-life operators do not have a simple closed-form inverse. To ﬁnd the necessary subexpression specs, we may need to search over the entire codomain of the corresponding subexpressions, which is often either inﬁnite or too
1Also known in the literature as divide-and-conquer search, top-down search, and backpropagation-based search (not to be confused with the backpropagation algorithm for training neural networks [20], although this name was inspired by similarities between the two techniques).

7.3. Deduction-Based Techniques

97

large. For example, consider an inverse semantics to a list-processing operator Filter(λx → Π, L) with respect to a given output list . It must ﬁnd all lists L and predicates Π such that ﬁltering of L with Π yields . For any non-trivial grammar underneath the symbols L and Π the number of possible such inputs is inﬁnite.
To mitigate this, the approach uses three key ideas:
Witness function: A generalization of inverse semantics. It returns a subset of the possible inputs that produce the outputs in φ by employing some heuristics to pick only likely inputs. For instance, in the Filter scenario above, it may ignore large input lists L.
Constraints: An under-speciﬁcation that generalizes examples. It describes some property of the output of the desired program, as opposed to providing the entire output value (like in Example 7.3). In the Filter scenario, one necessary spec on L is “its output should contain as a sub-list”. Of course, the witness functions for the operators underneath L must be able to handle such a spec.
Case split: Per-parameter decomposition of inverse semantics. Instead of constructing all subexpression specs (i.e., necessary inputs) at the same time, we construct them one at a time. Each parameter Ei of each operator has a corresponding witness function, which constructs a necessary spec φi for that parameter subexpression. We then recursively learn a set of programs Ei φi that are consistent with this spec. This set is split into subsets based on the outputs of its programs on the inputs in φi.2 After that, the search considers each branch of the case split independently, under the assumption that the desired subexpression Ei evaluates to the corresponding output. All subsequent witness functions for the other parameters take this assumption into account, constructing smaller and simpler necessary specs.
In the Filter scenario, we can decompose the inverse semantics by ﬁrst synthesizing possible input lists L, and then splitting on
2If φi is an example-based spec, the split will contain only one subset because all programs in Ei must output the same value. In a more general case where φi is a constraint there may be more than one subset.

98

Programming by Examples

them to synthesize possible predicates Π. Suppose we learned some ﬁnite set of programs L that are consistent with the constraint “its output should contain as a sub-list”. For each concrete input list produced by some program in L we can invoke a conditional witness function for the parameter Π. This witness function constructs a necessary spec on Π, answering the following question: what predicate ﬁlters a list into ? One natural implementation of this witness function constructs a constraint “Π must return true on all values in , and false on all values in \ .”
The overall algorithm relies on the designer-provided witness functions to backpropagate the examples through DSL operators. Traditionally, it also uses VSAs (§7.2) as its underlying representation for sets of learnt programs. It does not have to be a VSA but this data structure is particularly suitable as it supports eﬃcient implementations of two important operations:
Intersection of program sets: to construct a set of programs consistent with multiple examples φ1 ∧ · · · ∧ φn from n sets of programs that are consistent with individual examples.
Clustering of program sets: to perform a case split after learning a program set for a single parameter of a DSL operator.
(Optional) Ranking: to learn the best program with respect to some ranking function h, picking the best parameter programs from the learnt program sets on the ﬂy.
7.3.2 Type-Based Perspective
A type-based perspective on deductive top-down PBE interprets a synthesis problem as a type inhabitance problem [33, 102, 111]. This interpretation is most powerful in a setting where the underlying DSL is loosely-constrained, that is, permits arbitrary type-safe combinations of subexpressions. In particular, any ML-like calculus with algebraic data types can serve as a core language for type-driven synthesis.
Type-theoretic interpretation of PBE relies on two key ideas. First, it views examples, specs, and constraints on the desired program as type

7.3. Deduction-Based Techniques

99

reﬁnements. The theory of reﬁnement types [32, 34, 121] studies types decorated with predicates from a decidable logic. For example, the type {ν : List α | length ν = n} describes all lists of a ﬁxed length n. Under this interpretation, an input-output example (i : τ1, o : τ2) is simply a function type {ν : τ1 → τ2 | ν i = o}, or, more succinctly, {i} → {o} where {x} denotes a singleton type which contains only the value x.
Second, the theory of reﬁnement types has developed procedures for solving the type inhabitance problem—ﬁnding a term that has a given type (which can be viewed isomorphically as reﬁnement type checking). This is a well-studied problem in the literature, with natural deduction [29] being the most common approach. More generally, all such approaches to type checking/inhabitance exhibit properties similar to the top-down search: they push the reﬁnements on an expression down to its subexpressions, and use the results of type checking for the subexpressions to infer new reﬁnements for the sibling terms. Since ill-typed terms vastly outnumber well-typed ones, and local inference procedures eliminate the ill-typed candidates, checking type inhabitance is very eﬃcient for suﬃciently expressive reﬁnements.
The most notable works that employ type-theoretic interpretation of program synthesis are Myth [33, 102] and Synquid [111]. The Myth framework is a type-theoretic interpretation of PBE, whereas Synquid supports arbitrary decidable constraints as reﬁnements. Both works leverage and extend prior work on reﬁnement type checking, described above. Speciﬁcally, Frankle et al. develop a sequent calculus with an eﬃcient top-down theorem proving mechanism, and Polikarpova et al. extend the calculus of liquid types [121] with a similar top-down type inference procedure.
In addition to being an elegant interpretation of the synthesis problem, type-driven approaches also work extremely eﬃciently in scenarios when the underlying language permits eﬃcient reasoning by a type inhabitance algorithm. A notable recent example of such a scenario is the application of Synquid to enforcement of information ﬂow policies [112]. In this work, a Synquid-based component repairs an invalid access policy by synthesizing the weakest missing guard that would make the policy safe. Since the language of access policies is encoded

100

Programming by Examples

using liquid types, Synquid repairs complex policies in at most 100 sec, with the median time below 1 sec.

7.4 Ambiguity Resolution
Examples are inherently an under-speciﬁcation, i.e. there might be multiple possible programs in a rich hypothesis space that are consistent with a given set of examples. Given enough examples, one can reﬁne the speciﬁcation such that only desired programs are consistent. But in many real-world settings, expecting users to provide large number of examples is not realistic, and the usability of the PBE system is often characterized by the fewest number of examples needed to understand the user intent. The number or representative input-output examples required to learn a desired program is a function of the underlying DSL and has also been previously referred to as the teaching dimension of the DSL [39]. As the expressiveness of the DSL increases (allowing users to perform richer variety of tasks), the number of representative examples needed to discriminate the programs in the DSL also increases. We now discuss two techniques to enable learning programs in rich DSLs using very few input-output examples (often only 1 input-output example).
7.4.1 Ranking
The main idea of ranking is to assign a likelihood score to each program in the set of programs induced from a small set of input-output examples such that the programs with the highest scores correspond to the desired user-intended programs. There have been many previous approaches in program synthesis where such ranking functions have been deﬁned manually [51, 84, 90, 106]. The design of a good ranking function requires a lot of domain expertise and insights, and is typically a timeconsuming and error-prone process. Moreover, such ranking functions are inherently not robust to changes in the DSL or benchmark problems as the space of possible ranking functions is quite large and it is diﬃcult to analyze each possible function manually. Singh and Gulwani [128] proposed a machine learning based technique to automatically learn a ranking function (over syntactic program features) for PBE systems from

7.4. Ambiguity Resolution

101

training data. Ellis and Gulwani [30] proposed another machine learning

based technique to learn a ranking function that rely upon features that

are independent of the program structure, instead relying upon a learned

bias over program behaviors, and more generally over program execution

traces. There are three key challenges in automatically learning such

ranking functions. First, a large set of labeled training data is needed.

Second, an appropriate machine learning technique is needed with the

corresponding cost function to optimize. Finally, the ranking function

should be such that it allows for eﬃcient identiﬁcation of the top-ranked

program without having to enumerate every single program in the set

of induced programs.

The machine learning based ranking technique was applied to the

FlashFill PBE system [128] and resulted in signiﬁcant improvements

over previous manually designed ranking functions. FlashFill constructs

the set of programs consistent with a given set of input-output examples

using a VSA consisting of union nodes, join nodes, and explicit enu-

meration nodes. The ranking function is correspondingly deﬁned in a

hierarchical fashion in terms of individual ranking function for each kind

of node in the VSA. The ranking function ﬁrst recursively computes the

top expression for each individual node in the DAG, and then composes

them using an algorithm similar to Dijsktra’s shortest path algorithm

to ﬁnd the top ranked top-level expression in the DSL. The hierarchical

ranking function allows eﬃcient identiﬁcation of top-ranked program

without enumeration (i.e. without breaking up the VSA-based sharing).

The idea to rank programs is inspired from the work on learning

to rank [16, 24, 35, 54] techniques used in information retrieval. These

techniques typically aim at ranking all relevant documents above all

non-relevant documents or ranking the most relevant document as

highest. However, in program synthesis, it is suﬃcient to rank any

correct program higher than all incorrect programs. This is the key

insight that is used to design the cost function to be optimized.

Let’s assume the training data consists of a set of tasks T =

{t1, · · · , tn}. A task ti consists of a set of input-output examples

Ei

=

{ei1, · · · , ein(ti)},

where

an

example

ei
j

=

(inij, outij)

denotes

a

pair of input string (ini) and output string (outi). During training, it is

102

Programming by Examples

assumed that enough input-output examples are provided such that only

desired programs are consistent with the set of examples. The complete

set of input-output examples for all tasks can be obtained by taking the

union of the set of examples for each task E = {e1, · · · , en(e)} = ∪tEt.

Let pi denote the set of synthesized programs that are consistent with

1

n(i)

example ei such that pi = {pi , · · · , pi }, where n(i) denotes the num-

ber of programs in the set pi. The programs are labeled as positive and

negative programs using the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 7.1 (Positive and Negative Programs). A program p ∈ pj is labeled as a positive program if it belongs to the set intersection of the
set of programs for all examples of task ti, i.e. p ∈ p1 ∩ p2 ∩ · · · ∩ pn(ti). Otherwise, the program p ∈ pj is labeled a negative (or incorrect) program i.e. p ∈ p1 ∩ p2 ∩ · · · ∩ pn(ti).

In other words, if a program is consistent with all the input-output

examples then it is labeled as a positive program. Otherwise, it is labeled

as a negative program.

The training data can be automatically generated given a set of

FlashFill benchmarks. Consider a training task ti consisting of the inputoutput examples Ei = {(e1, · · · , en(ti)} and let pj be the set of programs synthesized by the synthesis algorithm that are consistent with the input-

output example ej. For a task ti, the set of all positive programs can be

constructed as p1∩p2∩· · ·∩pn(ti), whereas the set of all negative programs

can be computed as the set: {pk \ (p1 ∩ p2 ∩ · · · ∩ pn(ti)) | 1 ≤ k ≤ n(ti)}.

The VSA based represented allows a polynomial time construction of

1

n(i)

these labeled program sets. The set of programs pi = {pi , · · · , pi }

for an example ei are assigned a corresponding set of labels yi =

1

n(i)

j

j

{yi , · · · , yi }, where label yi denotes the label for program pi . The

labels yij take binary values such that the value yij = 1 denotes that the

program pij is a positive program for the task, whereas the label value

0 denotes that program pij is a negative program for the task.

Given the labeled training data, task is to learn a ranking func-

tion that can assign a score to programs to prefer positive programs over negative programs. A feature vector xij = φ(ei, pij) can be computed for each example-program pair (ei, pij), ei ∈ E, pij ∈ pi. For each example ei, a training instance (xi, yi) is added to the train-

7.4. Ambiguity Resolution

103

1

n(i)

ing set, where xi = {xi , · · · , xi } denotes the list of feature vec-

1

n(i)

tors and yi = {yi , · · · , yi } denotes their corresponding labels. The

goal is to learn a ranking function f that computes the ranking score

1

n(i)

zi = (f (xi ), · · · , f (xi )) for each example such that a positive program

is ranked as highest.

This problem formulation is similar to the problem formulation of

listwise approaches for learning-to-rank [16, 148]. The main diﬀerence

comes from the fact that while previous listwise approaches aim to rank

most documents in accordance with their training scores or rank the

most relevant document as highest, in program synthesis, it is suﬃcient

to rank any one positive program higher than all negative programs.

Therefore, the loss function counts the number of examples where a

negative program is ranked higher than all positive programs, as shown

in Equation 7.1. For each example, the loss function compares the

maximum rank of a negative program with the maximum rank of a

positive program, and adds 1 to the loss function if a negative program

is ranked highest (and subtracts 1 otherwise).

n(e)

L(E) = L(yi, zi)

(7.1)

i=1

n(e)
= sign max{f (xij) | yij = 0} − max{f (xki ) | yik = 1}
i=1

The non-continuity of the sign and max functions loss function makes it unsuitable for gradient descent based optimization as the gradient of the function can not be computed. Therefore, smooth approximations of the sign and max functions using the hyperbolic tanh function and softmax function respectively (with scaling constants c1 and c2) are used to obtain a continuous and diﬀerentiable loss function in Equation 7.2.

L(yi, zi) = tanh c1 ×

1 × log

ec2×f (xij )

c2 yij =0

1 − × log

ec2×f (xki )

c2 yik=1

(7.2)

104

Programming by Examples

The desired ranking function f (xij) = w · xij is assumed to be a linear function over the features. The features are deﬁned over programs and input-output example strings. Let there be m features in the feature vector xij = {g1, · · · , gm} such that f (xij) = w0 + w1g1 + · · · + wmgm. The weights for the function can be learnt using the gradient descent algorithm that minimizes the loss function from Equation 7.2. The algorithm needs to be restarted multiple times to avoid local minimas.
The learnt ranking function performed signiﬁcantly better than a ranking approach based on Occam’s razor that smallest programs are the most general program. The learnt ranking function requires on average 1.44 examples per benchmark as compared to 4.18 required by the baseline approach. Moreover, it is able to learn the desired program from only 1 example for 74% of the benchmarks.

7.4.2 Active Learning
Another approach to reduce ambiguity is using the active learning approach to ask users for minimal number of additional input-output examples. Jha et.al. [59] proposed the idea of synthesizing distinguishing inputs for disambiguation in program synthesis, which we introduced in §3.2.1. The traditional synthesis approaches learn a program P that is consistent with a set of input-output examples {(ik, ok)}k. The idea in active learning based approach is to synthesize two programs P1 and P2, and an input i, such that the two programs are consistent on the set of input-output examples, i.e. P1(ik) = P2(ik) = ok, but they produce diﬀerent output on the input i, i.e. P1(i) = P2(i). The system can then ask the user to provide the desired output on input i to further guide the synthesis process.
Distinguishing inputs is one form of active learning—soliciting additional feedback from the user to initiate a new round of learning. Other user interaction models for PBE explored in the literature include:
• Displaying the program to the user. This may simplify ﬁnding a discrepancy by letting her analyze the program’s behavior.
• Paraphrasing the program in natural language. This is a variation of the previous option, more suitable for non-programmers.

7.4. Ambiguity Resolution

105

• Accepting negative examples, which indicate a discrepancy but do not provide the correct output for it. This simpliﬁes interaction if manually computing the desired output is too cumbersome.
Mayer et al. used the FlashProg system [88], also described in §3.2.1, to compare these interaction models in the domain of text extraction by example. They found that disambiguating questions help achieve greater correctness rates and faster task completion times, as compared to other models. Comparison of diﬀerent strategies for producing disambiguating question that would potentially alleviate unnecessary cognitive burden on the user is a topic of future research.
As of now, minimizing the number of clarifying questions during active learning is an open research problem. As mentioned before, the minimum number of questions required to learn a given concept is known as a teaching dimension of the DSL. Not only ﬁnding an optimal teaching sequence is NP-hard in general [39], it also has not yet been computed or bounded for most non-trivial languages used in program synthesis [58]. Despite the lack of optimal guarantees, active learning based approaches tend to converge quickly to the right solution, e.g. in 7 examples on average for SMT-guided learning of bitvector programs [59].

8
Future Work
We have seen tremendous progress recently in program synthesis techniques, and many PBE techniques are becoming mainstream inside industrial products. However, many challenges still remain. We conclude here with an overview of some immediate problems for the ﬁeld.
Debuggability An important challenge going forward will be that of debuggability. The user would require active assistance to reﬁne the speciﬁcation. The user would like to be be conﬁdent that the synthesizer generated an intended program, especially when the synthesized program needs to be executed more than once, on sensitive data, or on large amounts of data where the results are not easy to verify manually.
Multi-modal input Another big opportunity is to deﬁne the next generation of programming experience that goes beyond the requirement to compose syntactically correct sequence of instructions to realize a particular task. This new paradigm shall facilitate interactive programming using multi-modal natural input from the user. While this article has focused on techniques for handling example-based speciﬁcations, it turns out that natural language is a better ﬁt for certain class of tasks such as
107

108

Future Work

spreadsheet queries [46] and smartphone scripts [79]. The new paradigm shall allow expressing intent using combination of various means [117] such as examples, demonstrations, natural language, keywords, and sketches.
Adaptivity Program synthesis techniques can potentially beneﬁt by leveraging data from past invocations of the synthesizer by the same user or by other users in the cloud or enterprise. This past data can help guide the search more eﬃciently or help resolve the ambiguity in the user’s under-speciﬁcation more eﬀectively.
Statistical techniques Program synthesis techniques have mostly leveraged use of logical methods for search. While these techniques are good at leveraging semantic knowledge or properties of the various operators, they fall into scalability challenges when having to handle many disjunctive choices during search. There have recently been very impressive advances in use of deep learning methods for predicting various kinds of intended artifacts after being trained on relevant data. An interesting line of work would be to synergistically combine logical techniques with statistical techniques like deep learning methods to develop the next generation of foundational search techniques. It would also facilitate reasoning and synthesis for larger pieces of code.
Scaling The current program synthesis techniques have been successful at learning small programs with complex logic. Scaling the size of programs that can be synthesized remains an active area of research.
Knowledge transfer Most modern synthesis approaches leverage some form of domain-speciﬁc knowledge to reach suﬃcient scaling levels. While developing fast universal search algorithms currently is out of reach for synthesis, it may be possible to automatically generalize and transfer the insights learned from one domain to another.
Industrialization An important milestone in the lifetime of a technology is making it accessible for the general engineering audience, as

109
opposed to professionals with a relevant background. Program synthesis is a relatively new ﬁeld, and thus is not yet as widespread as program analysis. Further development of synthesis frameworks, solver-aided languages, and separation of domain-speciﬁc search components should help to further close this gap.

Acknowledgements
We thank Ravi Chugh for his assistance with the write-up on prodirect manipulation, and Emina Torlak for her feedback and assistance with the write-up on solver-aided programming.
111

References
[1] Takuya Akiba, Kentaro Imajo, Hiroaki Iwami, Yoichi Iwata, Toshiki Kataoka, Naohiro Takahashi, Michał Moskal, and Nikhil Swamy. Calibrating research in program synthesis using 72,000 hours of programmer time. Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA, Technical Report, 2013.
[2] Miltiadis Allamanis, Earl T. Barr, Christian Bird, and Charles Sutton. Learning natural coding conventions. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, pages 281–293. ACM, 2014.
[3] Rajeev Alur, Rastislav Bodík, Garvit Juniwal, Milo M. K. Martin, Mukund Raghothaman, Sanjit A. Seshia, Rishabh Singh, Armando Solar-Lezama, Emina Torlak, and Abhishek Udupa. Syntax-guided synthesis. In Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, FMCAD, pages 1–8, 2013.
[4] Rajeev Alur, Pavol Cerný, and Arjun Radhakrishna. Synthesis through uniﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computer-Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV), pages 163–179, 2015.
[5] Rajeev Alur, Dana Fisman, Rishabh Singh, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Results and analysis of SyGuS-Comp’15. In Proceedings Fourth Workshop on Synthesis, SYNT, pages 3–26, 2015.
[6] Rajeev Alur, Dana Fisman, Rishabh Singh, and Armando Solar-Lezama. SyGuS-Comp 2016: Results and analysis. In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Synthesis, SYNT@CAV 2016, Toronto, Canada, July 17-18, 2016., pages 178–202, 2016.
113

114

References

[7] Matej Balog, Alexander L. Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel Tarlow. DeepCoder: Learning to write programs. CoRR, abs/1611.01989, 2016.
[8] Sorav Bansal and Alex Aiken. Automatic generation of peephole superoptimizers. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS 2006, San Jose, CA, USA, October 21-25, 2006, pages 394–403, 2006.
[9] Sorav Bansal and Alex Aiken. Binary translation using peephole superoptimizers. In 8th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2008, December 8-10, 2008, San Diego, California, USA, Proceedings, pages 177–192, 2008.
[10] Daniel W. Barowy, Sumit Gulwani, Ted Hart, and Benjamin G. Zorn. FlashRelate: extracting relational data from semi-structured spreadsheets using examples. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Portland, OR, USA, June 15-17, 2015, pages 218–228, 2015.
[11] Clark Barrett, Pascal Fontaine, and Cesare Tinelli. The SMT-LIB Standard Version 2.6, 2010.
[12] Gilles Barthe, Juan Manuel Crespo, Sumit Gulwani, César Kunz, and Mark Marron. From relational veriﬁcation to SIMD loop synthesis. In ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP ’13, Shenzhen, China, February 23-27, 2013, pages 123–134, 2013.
[13] Alan W Biermann. The inference of regular LISP programs from examples. IEEE transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 8(8): 585–600, 1978.
[14] James Bornholt and Emina Torlak. Synthesizing memory models from framework sketches and litmus tests. In Programming Languages Design and Implementation, 2017.
[15] James Bornholt, Emina Torlak, Dan Grossman, and Luis Ceze. Optimizing synthesis with metasketches. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 51, pages 775–788. ACM, 2016.
[16] Zhe Cao, Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu, Ming-Feng Tsai, and Hang Li. Learning to rank: from pairwise approach to listwise approach. In ICML, 2007.

References

115

[17] Pavol Cerný, Krishnendu Chatterjee, Thomas A. Henzinger, Arjun Radhakrishna, and Rohit Singh. Quantitative synthesis for concurrent programs. In Computer Aided Veriﬁcation - 23rd International Conference, CAV 2011, Snowbird, UT, USA, July 14-20, 2011. Proceedings, pages 243–259, 2011.
[18] Krishnendu Chatterjee, Thomas A. Henzinger, Barbara Jobstmann, and Rohit Singh. Measuring and synthesizing systems in probabilistic environments. J. ACM, 62(1):9:1–9:34, March 2015. ISSN 0004-5411.
[19] Swarat Chaudhuri, Martin Clochard, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Bridging boolean and quantitative synthesis using smoothed proof search. SIGPLAN Not., 49(1):207–220, January 2014. ISSN 0362-1340.
[20] Yves Chauvin and David E. Rumelhart. Backpropagation: theory, architectures, and applications. Psychology Press, 1995.
[21] Salman Cheema, Sarah Buchanan, Sumit Gulwani, and Joseph J. LaViola Jr. A practical framework for constructing structured drawings. In IUI’14 19th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI’14, Haifa, Israel, February 24-27, 2014, pages 311–316, 2014.
[22] Alvin Cheung, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Samuel Madden. Optimizing database-backed applications with query synthesis. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’13, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-19, 2013, pages 3–14, 2013.
[23] Ravi Chugh, Brian Hempel, Mitchell Spradlin, and Jacob Albers. Programmatic and direct manipulation, together at last. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2016, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, June 13-17, 2016, pages 341–354, 2016.
[24] David Cossock and Tong Zhang. Subset ranking using regression. Learning Theory, 4005:605–619, 2006.
[25] Allen Cypher, editor. Watch What I Do – Programming by Demonstration. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1993.
[26] Loris D’Antoni, Roopsha Samanta, and Rishabh Singh. Qlose: Program Repair with Quantitative Objectives. In Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV). Springer-Verlag, 2016.
[27] Luc De Raedt. Logical and Relational Learning. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition, 2010.

116

References

[28] Aditya Desai, Sumit Gulwani, Vineet Hingorani, Nidhi Jain, Amey Karkare, Mark Marron, Sailesh R., and Subhajit Roy. Program synthesis using natural language. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 345–356, 2016.
[29] Joshua Dunﬁeld. A uniﬁed system of type reﬁnements. PhD thesis, Air Force Research Laboratory, 2007.
[30] Kevin Ellis and Sumit Gulwani. Learning to learn programs from examples: Going beyond program structure. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2017.
[31] Yu Feng, Ruben Martins, Yuepeng Wang, Isil Dillig, and Thomas W. Reps. Component-based synthesis for complex APIs. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, 2017.
[32] Cormac Flanagan. Hybrid type checking. In ACM Sigplan Notices, volume 41, pages 245–256. ACM, 2006.
[33] Jonathan Frankle, Peter-Michael Osera, David Walker, and Steve Zdancewic. Example-directed synthesis: a type-theoretic interpretation. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 51, pages 802–815. ACM, 2016.
[34] Tim Freeman and Frank Pfenning. Reﬁnement types for ML. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 1991 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’91, pages 268–277, New York, NY, USA, 1991. ACM. .
[35] Yoav Freund, Raj Iyer, Robert E. Schapire, and Yoram Singer. An eﬃcient boosting algorithm for combining preferences. The Journal of machine learning research, 4:933–969, 2003.
[36] Alexander L. Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Rishabh Singh, Nate Kushman, Pushmeet Kohli, Jonathan Taylor, and Daniel Tarlow. TerpreT: A probabilistic programming language for program induction. CoRR, abs/1608.04428, 2016.
[37] Khaled Ghédira. Constraint Satisfaction Problems: CSP Formalisms and Techniques. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[38] Patrice Godefroid and Ankur Taly. Automated synthesis of symbolic instruction encodings from I/O samples. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pages 441–452. ACM, 2012.
[39] Sally A. Goldman and Michael J. Kearns. On the complexity of teaching. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 50:303–314, 1992.

References

117

[40] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural Turing machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
[41] C. Cordell Green. Application of theorem proving to problem solving. In IJCAI, pages 219–240, 1969.
[42] Sumit Gulwani. Dimensions in program synthesis. In Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, FMCAD 2010, Lugano, Switzerland, October 20-23, page 1, 2010.
[43] Sumit Gulwani. Automating string processing in spreadsheets using input-output examples. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLANSIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2011, Austin, TX, USA, January 26-28, 2011, pages 317–330, 2011.
[44] Sumit Gulwani. Programming by examples - and its applications in data wrangling. In Dependable Software Systems Engineering, pages 137–158. 2016.
[45] Sumit Gulwani and Nebojsa Jojic. Program veriﬁcation as probabilistic inference. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2007, Nice, France, January 17-19, 2007, pages 277–289, 2007.
[46] Sumit Gulwani and Mark Marron. NLyze: interactive programming by natural language for spreadsheet data analysis and manipulation. In International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2014, Snowbird, UT, USA, June 22-27, 2014, pages 803–814, 2014.
[47] Sumit Gulwani, Susmit Jha, Ashish Tiwari, and Ramarathnam Venkatesan. Synthesis of loop-free programs. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, June 4-8, 2011, pages 62–73, 2011.
[48] Sumit Gulwani, Vijay Anand Korthikanti, and Ashish Tiwari. Synthesizing geometry constructions. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, June 4-8, 2011, pages 50–61, 2011.
[49] Sumit Gulwani, William R. Harris, and Rishabh Singh. Spreadsheet data manipulation using examples. Commun. ACM, 55(8):97–105, 2012.
[50] Sumit Gulwani, Mikaël Mayer, Filip Niksic, and Ruzica Piskac. StriSynth: Synthesis for live programming. In 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE, pages 701–704, 2015.

118

References

[51] Tihomir Gvero, Viktor Kuncak, Ivan Kuraj, and Ruzica Piskac. Complete completion using types and weights. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 48, pages 27–38. ACM, 2013.
[52] William R. Harris and Sumit Gulwani. Spreadsheet table transformations from examples. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, June 4-8, 2011, pages 317–328, 2011.
[53] Brian Hempel and Ravi Chugh. Semi-automated SVG programming via direct manipulation. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST 2016, Tokyo, Japan, October 16-19, 2016, pages 379–390, 2016.
[54] Ralf Herbrich, Thore Graepel, and Klaus Obermayer. Large margin rank boundaries for ordinal regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 115–132, 1999.
[55] Ralf Herbrich, Tom Minka, and Thore Graepel. TrueSkill™: A Bayesian skill rating system. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 569–576, 2006.
[56] John H. Holland. Adaptation in natural and artiﬁcial systems: an introductory analysis with applications to biology, control, and artiﬁcial intelligence. U Michigan Press, 1975.
[57] Shachar Itzhaky, Sumit Gulwani, Neil Immerman, and Mooly Sagiv. A simple inductive synthesis methodology and its applications. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on ObjectOriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2010, October 17-21, 2010, Reno/Tahoe, Nevada, USA, pages 36–46, 2010.
[58] Susmit Jha and Sanjit A. Seshia. A Theory of Formal Synthesis via Inductive Learning. ArXiv e-prints, May 2015.
[59] Susmit Jha, Sumit Gulwani, Sanjit A. Seshia, and Ashish Tiwari. Oracleguided component-based program synthesis. In 2010 ACM/IEEE 32nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), volume 1, pages 215–224. IEEE, 2010.
[60] Barbara Jobstmann, Andreas Griesmayer, and Roderick Bloem. Program repair as a game. In Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV), pages 226–238. Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[61] Colin G. Johnson. Genetic programming with ﬁtness based on model checking. In European Conference on Genetic Programming, pages 114–124. Springer, 2007.

References

119

[62] Vladimir Jojic, Sumit Gulwani, and Nebojsa Jojic. Probabilistic inference of programs from input/output examples. Technical Report MSR-TR2006-103, Microsoft Research, 2006.
[63] Rajeev Joshi, Greg Nelson, and Keith H. Randall. Denali: A goal-directed superoptimizer. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), Berlin, Germany, June 17-19, 2002, pages 304–314, 2002.
[64] Armand Joulin and Tomas Mikolov. Inferring algorithmic patterns with stack-augmented recurrent nets. In NIPS, pages 190–198, 2015.
[65] Garvit Juniwal, Alexandre Donzé, Jeﬀ C. Jensen, and Sanjit A. Seshia. CPSGrader: Synthesizing temporal logic testers for auto-grading an embedded systems laboratory. In EMSOFT, pages 24:1–24:10, 2014.
[66] Łukasz Kaiser and Ilya Sutskever. Neural GPUs learn algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08228, 2015.
[67] Susumu Katayama. MagicHaskeller on the Web: Automated programming as a service. In Haskell Symposium, 2013.
[68] Gal Katz and Doron A. Peled. Genetic programming and model checking: Synthesizing new mutual exclusion algorithms. In Automated Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis, 6th International Symposium, ATVA 2008, Seoul, Korea, October 20-23, 2008. Proceedings, pages 33–47, 2008.
[69] Ross D. King, Stephen Muggleton, Ashwin Srinivasan, and M.J. Sternberg. Structure-activity relationships derived by machine learning: The use of atoms and their bond connectivities to predict mutagenicity by inductive logic programming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(1):438–442, 1996.
[70] A. N. Kolmogorov. Zur deutung der intuitionistischen logik. Math. Zeitschr, 35:58–365, 1932.
[71] John R. Koza. Hierarchical genetic algorithms operating on populations of computer programs. In Proceedings of the 11th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 768–774. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1989.
[72] John R. Koza. Genetic programming - on the programming of computers by means of natural selection. Complex adaptive systems. MIT Press, 1993.
[73] John R Koza. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Statistics and Computing, 4(2):87–112, 1994.

120

References

[74] Shriram Krishnamurthi. Educational pearl: Automata via macros. Journal of Functional Programming, 16(03):253–267, 2006.
[75] Michael Kuperstein, Martin T. Vechev, and Eran Yahav. Automatic inference of memory fences. In Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, FMCAD 2010, Lugano, Switzerland, October 20-23, pages 111–119, 2010.
[76] Karol Kurach, Marcin Andrychowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural randomaccess machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06392, 2015.
[77] Tessa A. Lau, Pedro Domingos, and Daniel S. Weld. Version space algebra and its application to programming by demonstration. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 527–534, 2000.
[78] Vu Le and Sumit Gulwani. FlashExtract: a framework for data extraction by examples. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’14, Edinburgh, United Kingdom June 09 - 11, 2014, page 55, 2014.
[79] Vu Le, Sumit Gulwani, and Zhendong Su. SmartSynth: synthesizing smartphone automation scripts from natural language. In The 11th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, MobiSys’13, Taipei, Taiwan, June 25-28, 2013, pages 193–206, 2013.
[80] Claire Le Goues, ThanhVu Nguyen, Stephanie Forrest, and Westley Weimer. Genprog: A generic method for automatic software repair. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 38(1):54–72, 2012.
[81] Alan Leung, John Sarracino, and Sorin Lerner. Interactive parser synthesis by example. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Portland, OR, USA, June 15-17, 2015, pages 565–574, 2015.
[82] Percy Liang, Michael I. Jordan, and Dan Klein. Learning programs: A hierarchical Bayesian approach. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-10), pages 639–646, 2010.
[83] Francesca A. Lisi. Building rules on top of ontologies for the Semantic Web with inductive logic programming. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming, 8(03):271–300, 2008.
[84] David Mandelin, Lin Xu, Rastislav Bodík, and Doug Kimelman. Jungloid mining: helping to navigate the API jungle. In PLDI, pages 48–61, 2005.
[85] Zohar Manna and Richard J. Waldinger. Toward automatic program synthesis. Commun. ACM, 14(3):151–165, 1971.

References

121

[86] Zohar Manna and Richard J. Waldinger. Knowledge and reasoning in program synthesis. Artif. Intell., 6(2):175–208, 1975.
[87] Henry Massalin. Superoptimizer - A look at the smallest program. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS II), Palo Alto, California, USA, October 5-8, 1987., pages 122–126, 1987.
[88] Mikaël Mayer, Gustavo Soares, Maxim Grechkin, Vu Le, Mark Marron, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, Ben Zorn, and Sumit Gulwani. User interaction models for disambiguation in programming by example. In 28th ACM User Interface Software and Technology Symposium, pages 291–301. ACM, 2015.
[89] Aditya Krishna Menon, Omer Tamuz, Sumit Gulwani, Butler W. Lampson, and Adam Kalai. A machine learning framework for programming by example. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013, Atlanta, GA, USA, 16-21 June 2013, pages 187–195, 2013.
[90] Alon Mishne, Sharon Shoham, and Eran Yahav. Typestate-based semantic code search over partial programs. In OOPSLA, pages 997–1016, 2012.
[91] Tom M. Mitchell. Generalization as search. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 18(2): 203–226, 1982.
[92] Stephen Muggleton. Inductive logic programming. New generation computing, 8(4):295–318, 1991.
[93] Stephen Muggleton. Inverse entailment and Progol. New generation computing, 13(3-4):245–286, 1995.
[94] Stephen Muggleton and Wray Buntine. Machine invention of ﬁrst-order predicates by inverting resolution. In Proceedings of the ﬁfth international conference on machine learning, pages 339–352, 1992.
[95] Stephen Muggleton, Ross D. King, and Michael J.E. Stenberg. Protein secondary structure prediction using logic-based machine learning. Protein Engineering, 5(7):647–657, 1992.
[96] Stephen Muggleton, Dianhuan Lin, Niels Pahlavi, and Alireza Tamaddoni-Nezhad. Meta-interpretive learning: application to grammatical inference. Machine Learning, 94(1):25–49, 2014.
[97] Stephen Muggleton, Dianhuan Lin, and Alireza Tamaddoni-Nezhad. Meta-interpretive learning of higher-order dyadic Datalog: Predicate invention revisited. Machine Learning, 100(1):49–73, 2015.

122

References

[98] Arvind Neelakantan, Quoc V. Le, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural programmer: Inducing latent programs with gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04834, 2015.
[99] Hoang Duong Thien Nguyen, Dawei Qi, Abhik Roychoudhury, and Satish Chandra. SemFix: program repair via semantic analysis. In 35th International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE, pages 772–781, 2013.
[100] Robert P. Nix. Editing by example. In Conference Record of the Eleventh Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, January 1984, pages 186–195, 1984.
[101] Aditya V. Nori, Sherjil Ozair, Sriram K. Rajamani, and Deepak Vijaykeerthy. Eﬃcient synthesis of probabilistic programs. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 50, pages 208–217. ACM, 2015.
[102] Peter-Michael Osera and Steve Zdancewic. Type-and-example-directed program synthesis. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 619–630. ACM, 2015.
[103] Pavel Panchekha and Emina Torlak. Automated reasoning for web page layout. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2016, pages 181–194, 2016.
[104] Pavel Panchekha, Alex Sanchez-Stern, James R. Wilcox, and Zachary Tatlock. Automatically improving accuracy for ﬂoating point expressions. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 50(6):1–11, 2015.
[105] Emilio Parisotto, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Rishabh Singh, Lihong Li, Dengyong Zhou, and Pushmeet Kohli. Neuro-symbolic program synthesis. CoRR, abs/1611.01855, 2016.
[106] Daniel Perelman, Sumit Gulwani, Thomas Ball, and Dan Grossman. Type-directed completion of partial expressions. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 47, pages 275–286. ACM, 2012.
[107] Stuart Pernsteiner, Calvin Loncaric, Emina Torlak, Zachary Tatlock, Xi Wang, Michael D. Ernst, and Jonathan Jacky. Investigating Safety of a Radiotherapy Machine Using System Models with Pluggable Checkers, pages 23–41. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016. .
[108] Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana, Tikhon Jelvis, Rohin Shah, Nishant Totla, Sarah Chasins, and Rastislav Bodik. Chlorophyll: Synthesis-aided compiler for low-power spatial architectures. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 49, pages 396–407. ACM, 2014.

References

123

[109] Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana, Aditya Thakur, Rastislav Bodík, and Dinakar Dhurjati. Scaling up superoptimization. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 297–310, 2016.
[110] Amir Pnueli and Roni Rosner. On the synthesis of a reactive module. In POPL, pages 179–190. ACM, 1989.
[111] Nadia Polikarpova, Ivan Kuraj, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Program synthesis from polymorphic reﬁnement types. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 522–538. ACM, 2016.
[112] Nadia Polikarpova, Jean Yang, Shachar Itzhaky, and Armando SolarLezama. Type-driven repair for information ﬂow security. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.03445, 2016.
[113] Oleksandr Polozov and Sumit Gulwani. FlashMeta: a framework for inductive program synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2015, pages 107–126, 2015.
[114] Veselin Raychev, Martin Vechev, and Eran Yahav. Code completion with statistical language models. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 49, pages 419–428. ACM, 2014.
[115] Veselin Raychev, Pavol Bielik, Martin Vechev, and Andreas Krause. Learning programs from noisy data. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 51, pages 761–774. ACM, 2016.
[116] Mohammad Raza and Sumit Gulwani. Automated data extraction using predictive program synthesis. In AAAI, 2017.
[117] Mohammad Raza, Sumit Gulwani, and Natasa Milic-Frayling. Compositional program synthesis from natural language and examples. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 792–800, 2015.
[118] Scott Reed and Nando de Freitas. Neural programmer-interpreters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06279, 2015.
[119] Wolfgang Reisig. Petri nets: an introduction, volume 4. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[120] Sebastian Riedel, Matko Bošnjak, and Tim Rocktäschel. Programming with a diﬀerentiable Forth interpreter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.06640, 2016.
[121] Patrick M. Rondon, Ming Kawaguci, and Ranjit Jhala. Liquid types. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 43, pages 159–169. ACM, 2008.

124

References

[122] Jose C.A. Santos, Houssam Nassif, David Page, Stephen Muggleton, and Michael J.E. Sternberg. Automated identiﬁcation of protein-ligand interaction features using inductive logic programming: a hexose binding case study. BMC bioinformatics, 13(1):1, 2012.
[123] Eric Schkufza, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. Stochastic superoptimization. In ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, volume 41, pages 305–316. ACM, 2013.
[124] Eric Schkufza, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. Stochastic superoptimization. In Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’13, pages 305–316, 2013.
[125] David E. Shaw, William R. Swartout, and C. Cordell Green. Inferring LISP programs from examples. In Proceedings of the 4th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence - Volume 1, pages 260–267. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1975.
[126] Rishabh Singh and Sumit Gulwani. Synthesizing number transformations from input-output examples. In Computer Aided Veriﬁcation - 24th International Conference, CAV 2012, pages 634–651, 2012.
[127] Rishabh Singh and Sumit Gulwani. Learning semantic string transformations from examples. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 5(8): 740–751, 2012.
[128] Rishabh Singh and Sumit Gulwani. Predicting a correct program in programming by example. In CAV, pages 398–414, 2015.
[129] Rishabh Singh and Sumit Gulwani. Transforming spreadsheet data types using examples. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLANSIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), pages 343–356, 2016.
[130] Rishabh Singh, Sumit Gulwani, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Automatic feedback generation for introductory programming assignments. In Proceedings of Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 15–26, 2013.
[131] David Canﬁeld Smith. Pygmalion: A Creative Programming Environment. PhD thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, 1975.
[132] Armando Solar-Lezama. Program synthesis by sketching. ProQuest, 2008.

References

125

[133] Saurabh Srivastava, Sumit Gulwani, and Jeﬀrey S. Foster. From program veriﬁcation to program synthesis. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2010, Madrid, Spain, January 17-23, 2010, pages 313–326, 2010.

[134] Saurabh Srivastava, Sumit Gulwani, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Jeﬀrey S. Foster. Path-based inductive synthesis for program inversion. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, June 4-8, 2011, pages 492–503, 2011.

[135] Saurabh Srivastava, Sumit Gulwani, and Jeﬀrey S. Foster. Templatebased program veriﬁcation and program synthesis. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (STTT), 15(5-6):497–518, 2013.

[136]

Michael J.E. Sternberg, Alireza Tamaddoni-Nezhad, Victor I. Lesk, Emily Kay, Paul G. Hitchen, Adrian Cootes, Lieke B. van Alphen, Marc P. Lamoureux, Harold C. Jarrell, Christopher J. Rawlings, et al. Gene function hypotheses for the campylobacter jejuni glycome generated by a logic-based approach. Journal of molecular biology, 425(1):186–197, 2013.

[137] Phillip D. Summers. A methodology for LISP program construction from examples. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 24(1):161–175, 1977.

[138] Alireza Tamaddoni-Nezhad, Ghazal Afroozi Milani, Alan Raybould, Stephen Muggleton, and David A. Bohan. Construction and validation of food webs using logic-based machine learning and text mining. Advances in Ecological Research, 49:225–289, 2013.

[139] Emina Torlak and Rastislav Bodik. Growing solver-aided languages with Rosette. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international symposium on New ideas, new paradigms, and reﬂections on programming & software, pages 135–152. ACM, 2013.

[140] Emina Torlak and Rastislav Bodik. A lightweight symbolic virtual machine for solver-aided host languages. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 49, pages 530–541. ACM, 2014.

[141] Abhishek Udupa, Arun Raghavan, Jyotirmoy V. Deshmukh, Sela MadorHaim, Milo M.K. Martin, and Rajeev Alur. TRANSIT: Specifying protocols with concolic snippets. In Proceedings of the 34th annual ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming Languages Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 287–296, 2013.

126

References

[142] Richard Uhler and Nirav Dave. Smten: automatic translation of high-level symbolic computations into SMT queries. In International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, pages 678–683. Springer, 2013.

[143] Martin T. Vechev, Eran Yahav, and Greta Yorsh. Abstraction-guided synthesis of synchronization. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLANSIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2010, Madrid, Spain, January 17-23, 2010, pages 327–338, 2010.

[144] Richard J. Waldinger and Richard C. T. Lee. PROW: A step toward automatic program writing. In IJCAI, pages 241–252, 1969.

[145] Henry S. Warren. Hacker’s delight. Pearson Education, 2013.

[146] Westley Weimer, ThanhVu Nguyen, Claire Le Goues, and Stephanie Forrest. Automatically ﬁnding patches using genetic programming. In 31st International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2009, May 16-24, 2009, Vancouver, Canada, Proceedings, pages 364–374, 2009.

[147]

Konstantin Weitz, Doug Woos, Emina Torlak, Michael D. Ernst, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Zachary Tatlock. Scalable veriﬁcation of border gateway protocol conﬁgurations with an SMT solver. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, pages 765–780. ACM, 2016.

[148] Fen Xia, Tie-Yan Liu, Jue Wang, Wensheng Zhang, and Hang Li. Listwise approach to learning to rank: theory and algorithm. In ICML, 2008.

[149] Navid Yaghmazadeh, Christian Klinger, Isil Dillig, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Synthesizing transformations on hierarchically structured data. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2016, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, June 13-17, 2016, pages 508–521, 2016.

[150] Xiaofeng Yang, Jian Su, Jun Lang, Chew Lim Tan, Ting Liu, and Sheng Li. An entity-mention model for coreference resolution with inductive logic programming. In ACL, pages 843–851, 2008.

[151] Hongyu Zhang, Anuj Jain, Gaurav Khandelwal, Chandrashekhar Kaushik, Scott Ge, and Wenxiang Hu. Bing developer assistant: improving developer productivity by recommending sample code. In Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, pages 956–961. ACM, 2016.

