Universal Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typology
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe◦, Timothy Dozat , Natalia Silveira , Katri Haverinen•, Filip Ginter•, Joakim Nivre , Christopher D. Manning
◦Linguistics Department, The Ohio State University Linguistics and Computer Science Departments, Stanford University
•Department of Information Technology, University of Turku Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University
Abstract Revisiting the now de facto standard Stanford dependency representation, we propose an improved taxonomy to capture grammatical relations across languages, including morphologically rich ones. We suggest a two-layered taxonomy: a set of broadly attested universal grammatical relations, to which language-speciﬁc relations can be added. We emphasize the lexicalist stance of the Stanford Dependencies, which leads to a particular, partially new treatment of compounding, prepositions, and morphology. We show how existing dependency schemes for several languages map onto the universal taxonomy proposed here and close with consideration of practical implications of dependency representation choices for NLP applications, in particular parsing.
Keywords: dependency grammar, Stanford Dependencies, grammatical taxonomy

1. Introduction
The Stanford Dependencies (SD) representation (de Marneffe et al., 2006) was originally developed as a practical representation of English syntax, aimed at natural language understanding (NLU) applications. However, it was deeply rooted in grammatical relation-based syntactic traditions, which have long emphasized cross-linguistic description. Faithfulness to these origins was attenuated by desiderata from our NLU applications and the desire for a simple, uniform representation, which was easily intelligible by non-experts (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008). Nevertheless, it is reasonable to suppose that these additional goals do not detract from cross-linguistic applicability.
In this paper, we attempt a (post-hoc) reconstruction of the underlying typology of the Stanford Dependencies representation. This not only gives insights into how the approach might be applied to other languages, but also gives an opportunity to reconsider some of the decisions made in the original scheme, aiming to propose an improved taxonomy, even for English. We suggest a taxonomy which has at its core a set of very broadly attested grammatical relations, supplemented as needed by subtypes for languageparticular relations, which capture phenomena important to the syntax of individual languages or language families.
We attempt to make the basic core more applicable, both cross-linguistically and across genres, and more faithful to the design principles in de Marneffe & Manning (2008). We consider how to treat grammatical relations in morphologically rich languages, including achieving an appropriate parallelism between expressing grammatical relations by prepositions versus morphology. We show how existing dependency schemes for other languages which draw from Stanford Dependencies (Chang et al., 2009; Bosco et al., 2013; Haverinen et al., 2013; Seraji et al., 2013; McDonald et al., 2013; Tsarfaty, 2013) can be mapped onto the new taxonomy proposed here. We emphasize the lexicalist stance of both most work in NLP and the syntactic theory on which Stanford Dependencies is based, and hence argue for a particular treatment of compounding and morphology.
We also discuss the different forms of dependency repre-

sentation that should be available for SD to be maximally useful for a wide range of NLP applications, converging on three versions: the basic one, the enhanced one (which adds extra dependencies), and a particular form for parsing.
2. A proposed universal taxonomy
Table 1 gives the taxonomy we propose for the universal grammatical relations, with a total of 42 relations. These relations are taken to be broadly supported across many languages in the typological linguistic literature.1
2.1. The representation builds on lexicalism
An under-elaborated part of the ﬁrst design principle in (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008) is that SD adopts the lexicalist hypothesis in syntax, whereby grammatical relations should be between whole words (or lexemes). There is a longstanding, unresolved debate in linguistics between theories which attempt to build up both words and phrases using the same compositional syntactic mechanisms (and in which the notion of a word has minimal privileged existence) versus those theories where the word is a fundamental unit and which see the morphological processes that build up words as fundamentally different from and hidden to those that build up sentences, sometimes termed the lexical integrity principle (Chomsky, 1970; Bresnan and Mchombo, 1995; Aronoff, 2007). For a practical computational model, there are great advantages to a lexicalist approach. However, there remain certain difﬁcult cases, such as how to deal with certain clitics (Zwicky and Pullum, 1983), phonologically bound words which behave like syntactic words (we follow many treebanks in separating them as words and having them participate in the syntax) and how to treat words that are split in unedited writing (see section 2.4.).
1This is not to say that all languages have all these grammatical relations. E.g., many languages, from English to Chichewˆ a, allow verbs to take more than one object, but other languages, such as French, do not. Nevertheless, iobj is broadly attested.

Core dependents of clausal predicates

Nominal dep Predicate dep

nsubj

csubj

nsubjpass

csubjpass

dobj

ccomp

xcomp

iobj

Non-core dependents of clausal predicates

Nominal dep Predicate dep Modiﬁer word

advcl

advmod

nﬁncl

neg

nmod

ncmod

Special clausal dependents

Nominal dep Auxiliary

vocative

aux

discourse

auxpass

expl

cop

Other mark punct

Coordination

conj

cc

Noun dependents

Nominal dep Predicate dep

nummod

relcl

appos

nﬁncl

nmod

ncmod

Modiﬁer word
amod det neg

Compounding and unanalyzed

compound

mwe

goeswith

name

foreign

Case-marking, prepositions, possessive case

Loose joining relations

list

parataxis

dislocated

remnant reparandum

Other Sentence head root

Unspeciﬁed dependency dep

Table 1: Dependencies in universal Stanford Dependencies. Note: nmod, ncmod, nﬁncl, and neg appear in two places.

2.2. Dependents of clausal predicates
The system of clausal dependents most closely follows Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) (Bresnan, 2001). However, the taxonomy differs from LFG in several respects. First, the clear distinction between core arguments and other dependents is made, but the distinction between adjuncts and oblique arguments (Radford, 1988) is taken to be sufﬁciently subtle, unclear, and argued over that it is eliminated.2 Second, the model reverts to the traditional grammar notion of direct object and other objects. In cases
2The original Penn Treebank annotators also decided not to try to mark arguments vs. adjuncts (Taylor et al., 2003). Conversely, the Penn Chinese Treebank does try to make an adjunct/argument distinction (Xue et al., 2005) and effectively PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005) adds an argument/adjunct distinction overlay to the English Penn Treebank.

of multiple objects, the theme/patient argument is the direct object. Finally, the taxonomy aims to clearly indicate in the dependency label (i) a non-canonical voice subject (where the proto-agent argument is not subject, i.e., in passives) and (ii) whether dependents are noun phrase (NP) arguments versus introducing a new clause/predicate. A design goal of SD has been to distinguish in dependency names where a new clause is being introduced (and so we distinguish nsubj and csubj; dobj and ccomp, but also advmod and advcl). We follow LFG in including a distinction between ccomp and xcomp for clausal complements that are standalone (have an internal subject) versus those having necessary control (omission) of the dependent predicate’s subject (have an external subject).3
Other aspects of the typology are less regular but still important. The non-core clausal dependents are all modiﬁers. The distinction between a full adverbial clause advcl and a participial or inﬁnitive nonﬁnite clause nﬁncl is similar but not exactly parallel to the ccomp/xcomp distinction.4 Clause heads have many other special dependents, including periphrastic auxiliaries, markers (complementizers and subordinating conjunctions) as well as vocatives and discourse elements (like well or um). Conjunctions combine elements of many categories. Under the SD design principles, the conj relation connects lexical heads.
2.3. Treatment of copulas
SD has advocated a treatment of the copula “be” where it is not the head of a clause, but rather the dependent of a lexical predicate, as in (1a). Such an analysis is motivated by the fact that many languages often or always lack an overt copula in such constructions, as in the Russian (1b). Similar constructions arise even in English if we consider so-called raising-to-object or small clause constructions. Under the basic analysis proposed for SD, the predicate complement is not linked to its subject argument, but in the enhanced representation (see below), the linkage is then parallel to the treatment in a zero copula language, as in (1c).
nsubj cop det amod
(1) a. Ivan is the best dancer
3The latter is used to represent control and raising constructions, including cases of raising-to-object or so-called “exceptional case marking”. The treatment of this last group of phenomena is one of the largest substantive breaks with the Penn Treebank annotation tradition, which follows Chomskyan approaches from the extended standard theory, Government-Binding Theory (Chomsky, 1981) et seq., in treating such constructions as having a complete clausal complement with “exceptional case marking”, rather than an object in the higher clause.
4For ccomp vs. xcomp, the deﬁning difference is a controlled subject. While an xcomp is always non-ﬁnite, there are also nonﬁnite ccomp, such as in a for-to inﬁnitive (“I arranged [for her to go by bus]”). For advcl vs. nﬁncl the distinction is a ﬁnite clause vs. a non-ﬁnite clause, though usually a reduced one lacking a subject. We generalize the previous partmod and infmod to nﬁncl for more generality and cross-linguistic applicability. We use nﬁncl rather than vmod since this modiﬁer can also be an adjective, as in “She hesitated [unable to remember his name]”.

b. Russian:
nsubj amod

Ivan lucˇsˇij tancor Ivan best dancer

nsubj

dobj

xcomp nsubj det amod

c. I judge Ivan the best dancer

2.4. Modiﬁcation vs. compounding
The universal scheme keeps the rich taxonomy of noun dependents that are one of the strengths of SD. An important part of the typology is to differentiate compounds (multi-root lexemes) from modiﬁcation or complementation. Under a lexicalist approach, compound words are fundamentally different from cases of phrasal modiﬁcation.
There are three relations for compounding. We use mwe for ﬁxed grammaticized expressions with function words (e.g., instead of : mwe(of,instead), Fr. plutoˆt que “rather than”: mwe(que,plutoˆt)), name for proper nouns constituted of multiple nominal elements, as in the Finnish and Italian dependency treebanks,5 and compound to label other types of multi-word lexemes. Thus compound is used for any kind of X0 compounding: noun compounds (e.g., phone book), but also verb and adjective compounds that are more common in other languages (such as Persian or Japanese light verb constructions); for numbers (e.g., three thousand books gives compound(thousand,three)); for particles of phrasal verbs (e.g., put up: compound(put,up)).

2.5. Treatment of prepositions and case marking
A major proposed change from the extant versions of SD is a new treatment of prepositions to provide a uniform analysis of prepositions and case in morphologically rich languages. The analysis we chose is to push all the way the design principle of having direct links between content words. We abandon treating a preposition as a mediator between a modiﬁed word and its object, and, instead, any case-marking element (including prepositions, postpositions, and clitic case markers) will be treated as a dependent of the noun it attaches to or introduces. The proposed analysis is shown in (2): nmod labels the relation between the two content words, whereas the preposition is now viewed as a case depending on its complement. In general, nmod expresses some form of oblique or adjunct relation further speciﬁed by the case.

nmod

det

case

(2) a. the Chair ’s

ofﬁce

det
b. the ofﬁce

nmod case det
of the Chair

c. French:
det
le bureau the ofﬁce

nmod case
du pre´sident of the Chair

5That is, name would be used between the words of “Hillary Rodham Clinton” but not to replace the usual relations in a phrasal or clausal name like “The Lord of the Rings”.

The treatment of case marking is illustrated in (3). In (3a), at in Hebrew is a separate token indicating an accusative object: the case marker depends on the object. In (3c), we show the analysis when case markers are morphemes. The case morpheme is not divided off the noun as a separate case dependent, but the noun as a whole is analyzed as a nmod of the verb. To overtly mark case, we include POS tags in the representation as shown in (3b) and (3d). We use the universal POS tagset from Petrov et al. (2012) to which we append case information.

(3) a. Hebrew:

dobj

case

wkfraiti

at

hsrj

and when I saw ACC the movie

b. dobj(wkfraiti/VERB, hsrj/NOUN) case(hsrj/NOUN, at/PRT-ACC)

c. Russian:
nmod

nsubj

dobj

Ya napisal pis’mo I wrote the letter

perom with a quill

d. nsubj(napisal/VERB, Ya/NOUN-NOM) dobj(napisal/VERB, pis’mo/NOUN-ACC) nmod(napisal/VERB, perom/NOUN-INSTR)

This treatment provides parallelism between different constructions across and within languages. A good result is that we now have greater parallelism between prepositional phrases and subordinate clauses, which are in practice often introduced by a preposition, as in (4).

nsubj
(4) a. Sue left

nmod case det
after the rehearsal

nsubj
b. Sue left

advcl
mark nsubj
after we did

We also obtain parallel constructions for the possessive alternation as shown in (2), for variant forms with case, a preposition or a postposition in Finnish, as shown in (5), and for the dative alternation where the prepositional construction gets a similar analysis to the double object construction, see (6).

(5) a. Finnish:
etsia¨ to search

nmod case
ilman johtolankaa without clue.PARTITIVE

nmod

case

b. etsia¨ taskulampun kanssa to search torch.GENITIVE with

nmod
c. etsia¨ johtolangatta to search clue.ABESSIVE

dobj iobj
(6) a. give the children the toys

nmod

dobj

case

b. give the toys to the children

c. French:
nmod

dobj

case

donner les jouets aux enfants give the toys to the children

Another advantage of this new analysis is that it provides a treatment of prepositional phrases that are predicative complements of “be” as in (7) that is consistent with the treatment of nominal predicative complements, as in (1).

(7) Sue

nsubj cop case
is in shape

SD is a surface syntactic representation, which does not represent semantic roles. The semantic roles of modiﬁers are hard to categorize and hard to determine. We feel that there is a lot of use for a representation which works solely in terms of the overt role-marking resources of each language. This is supported by many rich language-particular traditions of grammatical analysis, whether via Sanskrit cases or the case particles on Japanese bunsetsu.
Prepositions sometimes introduce a clause as their complement, e.g., (8a). Following the principle that dependencies do mark where new clauses are introduced, this relation should have a different name from nmod, and we suggest calling it ncmod “nominalized clause modiﬁer”. Under the proposed new analysis, the head of the modiﬁer of data will be upset. The result will be the analysis in (8b).

(8) a. We have no data about whether users are upset.

ncmod case mark nsubj cop
b. data about whether users are upset

Another issue is what analysis to give to cases of stacked prepositions, such as out of. Our proposal is that all such cases should be regarded as some form of mwe, as in (9b).

(9) a. Out of all this, something good will come.

case

mwe

predet

nmod

b. Out of all this . . . come

2.6. Informal text genres
Following the practical approach used in part-of-speech tagging of recent LDC treebanks, we introduce the relation goeswith to connect multiple tokens that correspond to a single standard word, as a result of reanalysis of words as compounds (“hand some” for “handsome”) or input error (“othe r” for “other”). We use foreign to label sequences of foreign words. To indicate disﬂuencies overridden in a speech repair, we use reparandum, as in (10).

nmod
case det

reparandum case det

(10) Go to the righ- to the left.

The “loose joining relations” aim at a robust analysis of more informal forms of text, which are now common in NLP applications. Informal written text often contains lists of comparable items, which are parsed as single sentences. Email signatures in particular contain these structures, in the form of contact information. Following de Marneffe et al. (2013), we use the list, parataxis, (and appos) relations to label these kinds of structures. The relation parataxis is also used in more formal writing for constructions such as sentences joined with a colon.
The dislocated relation captures preposed (topics) and postposed elements. The remnant relation is used to provide a treatment of ellipsis (in the case of gapping or stripping, where predicational or verbal material gets elided), something that was lacking in earlier versions of SD. It provides a basis for being able to reconstruct dependencies in the enhanced version of SD. For example, in (11), the remnant relations enable us to correctly retrieve the subjects and objects in the clauses with an elided verb.

nsubj

remnant dobj

remnant

remnant remnant

(11) John won bronze, Mary silver, and Sandy gold.

In contrast, in right-node-raising (RNR) (12) and VPellipsis (13) constructions in which some kind of predicational or verbal material is still present, the remnant relation is not used. In RNR, the verbs are coordinated and the object is a dobj of the ﬁrst verb. In VP-ellipsis, we keep the auxiliary as the head, as shown in (13).

nsubj

dobj conj cc

(12) John bought and ate an apple.

nsubj aux

cc dobj

(13) John will win gold

conj nsubj advmod
and Mary will too.

2.7. Language-particular relations
In addition to a universal dependency taxonomy, it is desirable to recognize grammatical relations that are particular to one language or a small group of related languages. Such language-particular relations are necessary to accurately capture the genius of a particular language but will not involve concepts that generalize broadly. The suggestion here is that these relations should always be regarded as a subtype of an existing Universal SD relation. The SD relations have a taxonomic organization (de Marneffe et al., 2006), and some of the universal relations are already subtypes of each other (e.g., auxpass is a subtype of aux). Language-particular relations that seem useful to distinguish for English are included at the bottom of Table 2: npmod for bare nominal modiﬁers of predicates lacking a preposition, among which in particular there is tmod for bare NP temporal modiﬁers; poss for possessives, since the syntax of prenominal possession is very distinct from postnominal modiﬁers (which may also express possession); predet for words such as all that precede regular determiners and preconj for words preceding a conjunction like either; and prt for verb particles.

3. Mapping to existing schemes
There has recently been an effort to push towards homogeneity across resources for different languages and to come up with cross-linguistically consistent annotation aimed at multi-lingual technology, for part-of-speech tagset (Petrov et al., 2012) as well as for dependency representation (McDonald et al., 2013). The scheme proposed in McDonald et al. (2013) took SD as a starting point. Annotators for six different languages (German, English, Swedish, Spanish, French and Korean) produced annotation guidelines for the language they were working on, keeping the label and construction set as close as possible to the original English SD representation. They were only allowed to add labels for phenomena that do not exist in English. Given the sets of relations obtained for the different languages, a harmonization step was performed to maximize consistency of annotation across languages. However, this rigid strategy lost some important distinctions, such as the distinction between compounding and phrasal modiﬁcation, while maintaining some distinctions that are best abandoned, such as a distinction between inﬁnitival and participial modiﬁers.
McDonald et al. (2013) does not address giving an elegant treatment of morphologically rich languages. In contrast, Tsarfaty (2013) proposes to treat morphology as syntax in her dependency proposal, illustrated with Hebrew. However, this representation choice conﬂicts with the lexicalist approach of SD. Here we take up her goal of trying to give a uniform treatment of both morphologically rich and morphologically poor languages, but suggest achieving the goal in a different way, which maintains a lexicalist approach (see Section 2.5.). Table 2 shows a comparison between the evolution of the SD scheme (Stanford Dependencies v2.0.0, used in the SANCL shared task, and Stanford Dependencies v3.3.0, the 2013/11/12 version), the proposals in McDonald et al. (2013) (GSD) and in Tsarfaty (2013) (TSD), and the dependency set proposed here (USD).
Existing dependency sets for other languages can be fairly straightforwardly mapped onto our new proposal. Even if the schemes examined here are “SD-centric”, they dealt with particular constructions present in each language and posited new relations when necessary. The mapping is less difﬁcult because USD adopts some of the ideas and relations that were ﬁrst developed for these other treebanks, such as the content word as head analysis of prepositional phrases from the Turku Dependency Treebank (TDT). In table 3, we show how the Finnish (Haverinen et al., 2013), Italian (Bosco et al., 2013), Chinese (Chang et al., 2009) and Persian (Seraji et al., 2013) schemes can be mapped onto the proposed universal taxonomy (USD). The bold labels are language-speciﬁc relations, and they are subtypes of the corresponding USD relation in the row. Gaps indicate existing constructions in the language that were not captured in the original scheme (the USD label is applicable there); ∗ indicates constructions that are not present in the language. Since copular verbs are not heads anymore, the attr relation is removed, requiring modiﬁcations to the existing analyses of copular sentences for Italian and Chinese. We also introduced extra relations for certain constructions, which some schemes had not incorporated yet.
For Finnish, the relation rel (for relative marker) will be

mapped to whatever syntactic role the relative is playing in the relative clause (nsubj, dobj, etc.), information which is present in the second annotation layer of the TDT corpus.
ISDT is the conversion of the MIDT Italian dependency scheme to SD. Some of the clit uses in ISDT (for reﬂexive pronouns in pronominal verbs – frequent in Romance languages – such as Fr. se douter “to suspect”) will be encompassed by expl. However, when the reﬂexive pronoun can truly be a direct or indirect object, it gets assigned the corresponding object relation.
Chinese has serial verb constructions which might now be compound (and not conj). We treat post-nominal localizers and prepositions as a form of case.
In Persian, there are no relative pronouns and rel was used for the ﬁxed relative marker, but it can be mapped to mark. UPDT has a fw relation between sequences of foreign words, unanalyzed within Persian grammar, which we adopt, naming it foreign. We also adopt the UPDT dep-top relation used for a fronted element that introduces the topic of a sentence, but we generalize it to dislocated to account for postposed elements as well as. Right dislocated elements are frequent in spoken languages: e.g., Fr. faut pas la manger, la paˆte (literally, “need not it eat, the dough”).
Labels of language-speciﬁc relations will be harmonized to be shared between languages: Chinese assmod will be mapped to poss, and Persian dep-top to topic.
4. Different forms of Stanford Dependencies
The current Stanford converter provides a number of variant forms of SD, of which the most used are the basic dependency tree, and the collapsed, cc-processed form that adds extra dependency arcs, restructures prepositions to not be heads, and spreads relations across conjunctions. This section suggests some new ideas for how to provide potentially less but different options.
One concern about our proposed taxonomy is that straightforward parsing to USD is likely to be harder for parsers than the current representation (for English). It is now fairly well known that, while dependency representations in which content words are made heads tend to help semantically oriented downstream applications, dependency parsing numbers are higher if you make auxiliary verbs heads, if you analyze long conjunctions by chaining (rather than having a single head of the whole construction), and if you make prepositions the head of prepositional phrases (Schwartz et al., 2012; Elming et al., 2013). The generalization is that dependency parsers, perhaps in particular the efﬁcient shift-reduce-style dependency parsers like MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007), work best the more the dependency representation looks like a chain of short dependencies along the sentence. Under the proposed USD, SD would then be making the “wrong” choice in each case.
However, it seems wrong-headed to choose a linguistic representation to maximize parser performance, rather than based on the linguistic quality of the representation and its usefulness for applications that build further processing on top of it. Rather, it may be useful to do parsing using a transformation of the target dependency system. In constituency parsing, it is completely usual for the target representation to be transformed so as to improve

SD v2.0.0 SD v3.3.0

nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj iobj ccomp xcomp acomp attr

nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj iobj ccomp xcomp acomp –

advmod advcl purpcl neg

advmod advcl – neg

det amod appos abbrev num rcmod partmod infmod quantmod

det amod appos – num rcmod partmod infmod quantmod

root punct aux auxpass cop

root punct aux auxpass cop

expl mark complm – – dep rel

expl mark – discourse – dep –

prep – pobj pcomp

prep – pobj pcomp

–

–

possessive possessive

nn – number mwe – – –

nn – number mwe goeswith – –

conj

conj

cc

cc

parataxis – – –

parataxis – – –

English particular

npadvmod npadvmod

tmod

tmod

predet

predet

preconj

preconj

prt

prt

poss

poss

GSD
nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj iobj ccomp xcomp acomp attr
advmod advcl – neg
det amod appos – num rcmod partmod infmod advmod
ROOT p aux auxpass cop
expl mark – – – dep rel
adpmod nmod adpobj adpcomp
adp adp
compmod mwe num mwe – – –
conj cc
parataxis – – –
nmod advmod – cc prt poss

TSD
nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj iobj ccomp xcomp acomp –
advmod – – neg
det amod appos abbrev nummod rcmod ? infmod ?
root punct aux auxpass cop
expl mark complm parataxis? – dep rel
prepmod – pobj pcomp
prep/case gen
nn – nummod? mwe – – –
conj cc
parataxis – – –
advmod? tmod predet preconj ? possmod

USD
nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj iobj ccomp xcomp – –
advmod advcl – neg
det amod appos – nummod relcl nﬁncl nﬁncl –
root punct aux auxpass cop
expl mark – discourse vocative dep –
case – nmod ncmod
case –
compound name – mwe goeswith foreign reparandum
conj cc
parataxis list remnant dislocated
npmod tmod predet preconj prt poss

Notes
(TSD also has gobj for genitive object) USD & TSD deﬁne as clause with internal subject, not ﬁnite USD & TSD deﬁne as clause with external subject, not nonﬁnite acomp can be generalized into xcomp attr removed: wh- is head or xcomp (with copula head option)
TSD omits but needed to preserve clause boundaries Folded into advcl As well as adverbial not, never, USD extends to negative det like no
(TSD deﬁnes dem and def as subtypes of det)
Parenthetical abbreviations become cases of appos Renamed for clarity
Make partmod, infmod into nﬁncl; use (rich) POS to distinguish Make partmod, infmod into nﬁncl; use (rich) POS to distinguish Generally folded into advmod
(TSD adds qaux for question auxiliary. Inﬁnitive is now mark.)
GSD has cop only in content-head version Subject and object expletives, frozen reﬂexives (Fr. se douter)
to introducing an inﬁnitive will now be mark (instead of aux) Remove and use mark more broadly A gap in original and other typologies A gap in original and other typologies GSD uses for vocative and discourse Converter’s unresolved ones now dep; TSD rel is really mark USD case is dependent of NP modiﬁer not of thing modiﬁed Equivalent to nmod below nmod now goes from thing modiﬁed to NP of PP ncmod goes from thing modiﬁed to clause TSD has N/A/G/D subtypes, but can’t keep adding for all cases View as a manifestation of case Generalize nn to light verbs, etc.; X0 compounding not modiﬁcation Multi-word proper nouns (e.g., John Smith) as in TDT and ISDT Regarded as type of compound; using nummod is wrong Fixed expressions with function words (so that, all but, due to, . . . ) For orthographic errors: othe r Linear analysis of foreign words (head is left-most) as in UPDT For disﬂuencies overridden in speech repairs
Used for informal list structures, signature blocks, etc. Used to give a treatment of ellipsis without empty nodes Preposed topics and dislocated elements as in UPDT
A subtype of nmod A subtype of npmod A subtype of det A subtype of cc A subtype of compound A subtype of case

Table 2: Comparison of proposals on English: SD, McDonald et al. (2013) (GSD), Tsarfaty (2013) (TSD) and ours (USD).

TDT
nsubj csubj ∗ ∗ dobj ∗ ccomp, iccomp xcomp, acomp ∗
advmod, quantmod advcl neg
det amod appos num rcmod partmod, infmod
root punct aux auxpass cop
∗ complm, mark intj voc dep
poss, gobj, gsubj, nommod ∗ adpos number, nn, prt name some dep
conj cc, preconj parataxis
ellipsis

ISDT
nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj , clit iobj , clit ccomp xcomp, acomp attr
advmod advcl neg
det, predet amod appos num rcmod partmod
root punct aux auxpass cop
expl, clit mark discourse
comp, mod
pobj, poss, npadvmod, tmod pcomp possessive, prep number, nn nnp mwe goeswith
conj cc, preconj parataxis

Chinese nsubj, top
nsubjpass
dobj iobj ccomp, rcomp
attr advmod, dvpmod some advmod neg det amod prnmod nummod, ordmod rcmod vmod root punct asp, mmod pass cop ∗ cpm
dep pobj, lobj, assmod, clf, range, tmod pccomp, lccomp assm, prep, ba, dvpm, loc nn, some conj
prtmod
conj, etc, comod cc

UPDT
nsubj ∗ nsubjpass ∗ dobj ∗ ccomp xcomp, acomp ∗
advmod, quantmod advcl neg
det, predet amod appos num rcmod ∗
root punct aux auxpass cop
∗ complm, mark, rel
dep-voc dep
pobj, poss, cpobj npadvmod, tmod ∗ acc, prep, cprep number, nn, prt, {nsubj|dobj|acomp|prep}-lvc
mwe
fw
conj cc, preconjunct parataxis
dep-top

USD
nsubj csubj nsubjpass csubjpass dobj iobj ccomp xcomp ∗
advmod advcl neg
det amod appos nummod relcl nﬁncl
root punct aux auxpass cop
expl mark discourse vocative dep
nmod
ncmod case compound name mwe goeswith foreign reparandum
conj cc parataxis list remnant dislocated

Table 3: Mappings of the Finnish (TDT), Italian (ISDT), Chinese and Persian (UPDT) schemes to USD.

parsing numbers, such as by head-lexicalization (Collins, 2003), by manual or automatic subcategorization of categories (Klein and Manning, 2003; Petrov et al., 2006), and even by other methods such as unary chain contraction (Finkel et al., 2008). After parsing, a detransformation process reconstructs trees in the target representation. This kind of transform-detransform architecture is at present less common in dependency parsing, although Nilsson, Nivre & Hall (2006; 2007) do this for coordination and verb groups, and pseudo-projective parsing (Nivre and Nilsson, 2005) can also be seen as an instance of this architecture. A transform-detransform architecture should become more

standard in dependency parsing. We therefore propose a parsing representation that changes some of the dependency head choices to maximize parsing performance. This requires developing tools to convert seamlessly both ways between the basic and parsing representations.6
Since the new treatment of prepositional phrases basically does what the collapsed representation was designed to do (putting a direct link between the noun complement of a preposition and what it modiﬁes), except for not renaming
6A small part of this is in place in the Stanford converter, in the ability to generate copula- and content-head versions from trees.

the dependency relation, the collapsed representation on its own has less utility. However, the ideas of having extra dependencies to mark external subjects and the external role in relative clauses is useful, the renaming of dependencies to include case or preposition information helps in many applications, and spreading relations over conjunctions is deﬁnitely useful for relation extraction. These transformations can be provided in an enhanced representation.
We thus suggest providing three versions of Stanford Dependencies: basic, enhanced, and parsing.
5. Conclusion
We proposed a taxonomy of grammatical relations applicable to a variety of languages, developing the implications of a lexicalist approach for the treatment of morphology and compounding. Some of the decisions made on linguistic grounds are at odds with what works best for processing tools. We suggested that the transform-detransform architecture standardly used in constituency parsing is the solution to adopt for dependency parsing. We worked out the mapping of existing dependency resources for different languages to the taxonomy proposed here. We hope this work will enhance consistency in annotation between languages and further facilitate cross-lingual applications.
6. References
Aronoff, M. (2007). In the beginning was the word. Language, 83:803–830.
Bosco, C., Montemagni, S., and Simi, M. (2013). Converting Italian treebanks: Towards an Italian Stanford dependency treebank. In Seventh Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse.
Bresnan, J. and Mchombo, S. A. (1995). The lexical integrity principle: Evidence from Bantu. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 13:181–254.
Bresnan, J. (2001). Lexical-Functional Syntax. Blackwell, Oxford.
Chang, P.-C., Tseng, H., Jurafsky, D., and Manning, C. D. (2009). Discriminative reordering with Chinese grammatical relations features. In Third Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 51–59.
Chomsky, N. (1970). Remarks on nominalization. In Jacobs, R. A. and Rosenbaum, P. S., editors, Readings in English transformational grammar, pages 184–221. Ginn, Waltham, MA.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Foris, Dordrecht.
Collins, M. (2003). Head-driven statistical models for natural language parsing. Computational Linguistics, 29:589–637.
de Marneffe, M.-C. and Manning, C. D. (2008). The Stanford typed dependencies representation. In Workshop on Cross-framework and Cross-domain Parser Evaluation.
de Marneffe, M.-C., MacCartney, B., and Manning, C. D. (2006). Generating typed dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In LREC.
de Marneffe, M.-C., Connor, M., Silveira, N., Bowman, S. R., Dozat, T., and Manning, C. D. (2013). More constructions, more genres: Extending Stanford dependencies. In DepLing 2013.

Elming, J., Johannsen, A., Klerke, S., Lapponi, E., Martinez, H., and Søgaard, A. (2013). Down-stream effects of tree-to-dependency conversions. In NAACL HLT 2013.
Finkel, J. R., Kleeman, A., and Manning, C. D. (2008). Efﬁcient, feature-based, conditional random ﬁeld parsing. In ACL 46, pages 959–967.
Haverinen, K., Nyblom, J., Viljanen, T., Laippala, V., Kohonen, S., Missila¨, A., Ojala, S., Salakoski, T., and Ginter, F. (2013). Building the essential resources for Finnish: the Turku dependency treebank. Language Resources and Evaluation. In press. Available online.
Klein, D. and Manning, C. D. (2003). Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In ACL 41, pages 423–430.
McDonald, R., Nivre, J., Quirmbach-Brundage, Y., Goldberg, Y., Das, D., Ganchev, K., Hall, K., Petrov, S., Zhang, H., Ta¨ckstro¨m, O., Bedini, C., Bertomeu Castello´, N., and Lee, J. (2013). Universal dependency annotation for multilingual parsing. In ACL 51.
Nilsson, J., Nivre, J., and Hall, J. (2006). Graph transformations in data-driven dependency parsing. In COLING 21 and ACL 44, pages 257–264.
Nilsson, J., Nivre, J., and Hall, J. (2007). Tree transformations for inductive dependency parsing. In ACL 45.
Nivre, J. and Nilsson, J. (2005). Pseudo-projective dependency parsing. In ACL 43, pages 99–106.
Nivre, J., Hall, J., Nilsson, J., Chanev, A., Eryigit, G., Ku¨bler, S., Marinov, S., and Marsi, E. (2007). MaltParser: A language-independent system for data-driven dependency parsing. Natural Language Engineering, 13:95–135.
Palmer, M., Gildea, D., and Kingsbury, P. (2005). The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:71–105.
Petrov, S., Barrett, L., Thibaux, R., and Klein, D. (2006). Learning accurate, compact, and interpretable tree annotation. In COLING 21 and ACL 44, pages 433–440.
Petrov, S., Das, D., and McDonald, R. (2012). A universal part-of-speech tagset. In LREC.
Radford, A. (1988). Transformational Grammar. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Schwartz, R., Abend, O., and Rappoport, A. (2012). Learnability-based syntactic annotation design. In COLING 24, pages 2405–2422.
Seraji, M., Jahani, C., Megyesi, B., and Nivre, J. (2013). Uppsala Persian dependency treebank annotation guidelines. Technical report, Uppsala University.
Taylor, A., Marcus, M., and Santorini, B. (2003). The Penn treebank: An overview. In Abeille´, A., editor, Building and Using Parsed Corpora, volume 20 of Text, Speech and Language Technology. Springer.
Tsarfaty, R. (2013). A uniﬁed morpho-syntactic scheme of Stanford dependencies. In ACL 51.
Xue, N., Xia, F., Chiou, F.-D., and Palmer, M. (2005). The Penn Chinese treebank: Phrase structure annotation of a large corpus. Natural Language Engineering, 11:207– 238.
Zwicky, A. M. and Pullum, G. K. (1983). Cliticization vs. inﬂection: English n’t. Language, 59:502–513.

